THE NERVE GROWTH FACTOR: THIRTY-FIVE
YEARS LATER
Nobel lecture, December 8, 1986

by
RITA LEVI-MONTALCINI
Istituto di Biologia Cellulare, via G. Romagnesi 18/A, ROMA, Italy




 1) Neurogenesis and its early experimental approach
 2) Experimental neuroembryology in the forties
 3) The unexpected break: a gift from malignant tissues
 4) NGF at its early in-vitro and in-vivo debuts
 5) The vital role of NGF in the life of its target cells
 6) NGF as a retrograde trophic messenger and tropic factor
 7) Neuronal and non-neuronal target cells
 8) The I.D. card of NGF
 9) NGF, growth factors and protoncogenes
10) NGF in exocrine glands: a fortuitous presence or a biological function?
11) Foreseeable approaches and predictions of the unpredictable



Neurogenesis and its early experimental approach
“Embryogenesis is in some way a model system. It has always been distin-
guished by the exactitude, even punctitio, of its anatomical descriptions. An
experiment by one of the great masters of embryology could be made the text of
a discourse on scientific method. But something is wrong, or has been wrong.
There is no theory of development in the sense in which Mendelism is a theory
that accounts for the results of breeding experiments. There has therefore been
little sense of progression or timeliness about embryological research. Of many
papers delivered at embryological meetings, however good they may be in
 themselves, one too often feels that they might have been delivered five years
beforehand without making anyone much the wiser, or deferred for five
years without making anyone conscious of a great loss”       [1].
   This feeling of frustration, so incisively conveyed by these considerations
by P. Medawar, pervaded in the forties the field of experimental embryology
which had been enthusiastically acclaimed in the mid-thirties, when the upper
lip of the amphibian blastopore brought this area of research to the forefront of
the biological stage. The side branch of experimental neuroembryology, which
had stemmed out from the common tree and was entirely devoted to the study
of the trophic interrelations between neuronal cell populations and between
these and the innervated organs and tissues, was then in its initial vigorous
                                                                                    349


350                             Physiology or Medicine 1986


growth phase. It in turn suffered from a sharp decrease in the enthusiasm that
had inflamed the pioneers in this field, ever since R. G. ‘Harrison delivered his
celebrated lecture on this topic at the Royal Society in London in 1935 [2].
Although the alternate ‘wax and wane‘ cycles are the rule rather than the
exception in all fields of human endeavor, in that of biological sciences the
‘wane’ is all too often indicative of a justified loss of faith in the rational and
methodical approach that had at first raised so much hope.
   A brief account of the state-of-the-art of experimental neuroembryology in
the forties, when interest in this approach to the study of the developing
nervous system was waning, is a prerequisite for understanding the sudden
unforseeable turn of events which resulted in the discovery of the Nerve Growth
Factor.

Experimental neuroembryology in the early forties
The replacement, in 1934 by Viktor Hamburger, of the chick embryo with that
of the amphibian larva as object of choice for the analysis of the effects of limb
bud extirpation on spinal motor neurons and sensory nerve cells innervating
the limbs [3], signed the beginning of a long series of investigations centered on
the analysis of this and related experimental systems in avian embryos. Here I
shall only list the major advantages offered by the chick embryo over amphi-
bian larvae as object of neurological investigations.
   The avian nervous system is built according to a more elaborate design than
that of amphibians, and it lends itself to a more rigorous analysis of its nerve
centers than that of lower vertebrates. Extensive fundamental studies on the
nervous system of the chick embryo, with use of the invaluable silver specific
techniques by Ramon y Cajal and coworkers, extended recently by myself and
other investigators [4, 5], provided a very accurate blueprint of most nerve
centers and their developmental history during neurogenesis. This allowed the
detection of even small infractions to normal developmental rules in experi-
mentally manipulated embryos. At variance with ontogenetic processes in
amphibians, the same processes in chick embryos unfold according to a rigidly
scheduled time sequence which never departs from the anticipated. It is
therefore possible to compare the central and peripheral nerve centers of
experimental and control specimens in embryos incubated at the same tem-
perature and environmental conditions. The analysis, in amphibian larvae, was
extended to the brain, spinal cord and peripheral nervous system under various
experimental situations. In the chick embryo, it was mainly confined to the
study of the effects called forth by extirpation of limb primordia or implantation
of additional wing or leg buds on their innervating motor and sensory
nerve centers. In 1934, Viktor Hamburger published an article [3] on the
effects of wing bud extirpation on the development of the brachial spinal motor
segment and sensory dorsal root ganglia innervating the wing. He came to the
conclusion that the hypoplasia of motor nerve cells of the ventral horn and of
 other nerve cells of the same hemisection of the spinal cord resulted from
 lack of stimuli centripetally transmitted by nerve fibers of the first differentiated
neurons. These normally exert a regulatory effect on proliferation and differen-


                        The Nerve Growth Factor: Thirty-Five Years Later              351



 tiation of neighboring nerve cells. A reinvestigation of the effects produced by
 limb bud extirpation prospected a different control mechanism of the develop-
 ing nerve centers by peripheral tissues. Through serial studies of silver stained
embryos, the conclusion was reached that the severe hypoplasia of nerve
centers deprived of their fields of innervation, resulted from death of differenti-
ated neurons and not from failure of recruitment of neurons from a pool of still
uncommitted nerve cell precursors [6, 7]. In 1947, Hamburger invited me to
join him for the purpose of reinvestigating this problem. This invitation
 marked the beginning of a thirty year period that I spent at Washington
 University and of my life-long friendship with Viktor. Our 1949 article [7]
 confirmed the hypothesis previously submitted by G. Levi and myself [6]. The
 satisfaction of this confirmation of an important theoretical issue, and the
 successful analysis of other neuroembryological problems [8,9] was, however,
 perturbed by the awareness of the low resolution power of the techniques
 in our possession for in depth exploration of the tremendously complex
 neurogenetic processes. The temptation to abandon the experimental analysis
 of the developing nervous system and move into the phage field, in full blossom
 in the forties, did not take hold, however, thanks to unpredictable and most
 fortunate events which occurred at the same time and opened a new era in
 developmental neurobiology.

The unexpected break: a gift from malignant tissues
In a 1948 article, a former student of Viktor Hamburger, Elmer Bueker,
reported the results of a bold and imaginative experiment consisting in
grafting fragments of mouse sarcoma 180 in to the body wall of three-day chick
embryos. The histological study of the embryos fixed 3-5 days later, showed
that sensory nerve fibers emerging from adjacent dorsal root ganglia had
gained access into the neoplastic tissue while no motor nerve fibers entered into
the tumor [10]. The author concluded that histochemical properties of the fast
growing mouse sarcoma offered a favorable field for growth of sensory fibers.
This condition, in turn, resulted in a slight but consistent volume increase of
these ganglia as compared to that of homologous ganglia innervating the wing
of the contralateral side. Viktor and I reinvestigated this remarkable pheno-
menon adopting the method I had developed during my first neuroembryologi-
cal studies, i. e., that of a daily inspection of control and experimental embryos
serially sectioned and impregnated with a specific silver technique. Our results
confirmed those reported by Bueker, but at the same time uncovered other
effects elicited by the grafts of the mouse tumor, which hardly fit in with
the hypothesis that they were in the same range and of the same nature as those
called forth by transplants of normal embryonic tissues. They differed from the
latter in the following, most significant, respects: sympathetic and not only
sensory fibers gained access into the neoplastic tissues where they built a
network of extraordinarily high density; nerve fibers branched at random
between tumor cells without, however, establishing synaptic connections
with them; sensory and sympathetic ganglia innervating the tumor underwent
a progressive increase in volume, attaining, in the case of sympathetic ganglia,


352                                  Physiology or Medicine 1986


a size about six times larger than that of same control ganglia [11]. Subsequent
experiments uncovered another astonishing deviation from the norm in em-
bryos bearing transplants of mouse sarcoma 180 or of another tumor of identi-
cal origin, known as sarcoma 37. It was found that embryonic viscera which in
normal specimens are devoid of innervation, such as the mesonephroi, or which
become scarcely innervated only in late developmental stages, such as the sex
glands, the thyroid, the parathyroid and the spleen, were loaded with sympa-
thetic nerve fibers during early embryonic stages (12). A patent infraction of
all developmental rules came to light with the finding of thick sympathetic fiber
bundles inside the veins of the host where they protruded in the form of large
neuromas obstructing blood circulation (Fig. 1). All sympathetic chain ganglia,
and not only ganglia adjacent to or in direct connection with neoplastic tissues,
were enormously enlarged. The hypothesis that these anomalous effects could
result from the release by neoplastic cells of a soluble, diffusible agent which
altered the differentiative and growth properties of its target cells, received full




Fig 1. Sixteen-day chick embryo with intra-embryonic tumor (sarcoma 180). Ingrowth of sympa-
thetic nerve fibers into the Jugular, Vertebral, Subclavian Anterior Caval Veins. GN, Ganglium
Nodosum; JV, Jugular Vein; Pv.SG, Paravertebral Sympathetic Ganglion; SCL.V, Subclavian
Vein; VCA, Anterior Caval Vein; VV, Vertebral Vein. Arrows point to nerve agglomerations.
(from Ref. 12)


                                                                                                   353




Fig 2. Semi-diagrammatic reconstruction of a normal 11-day chick embryo                  of an 11-day
embryo carrying an intra-embryonic transplant of mouse sarcoma (S 37-81) and of an 11-day
embryo with transplant of sarcoma 37 on the chorio-allantoic membrane (S 37-220). Note the
hyperplastic growth of the prevertebral chain ganglia in embryos carrying tumor transplants.
Visceral nerve fibres from these ganglia invade the nearby mesonephroi. A, adrenal; G, gonad; L,
lung; M, mesonephros; PV, prevertebral ganglia; S, sensory nerves; Tu, tumor. (from Ref. 12)




 confirmation from experiments transplanting one or the other mouse sarcoma
 onto the chorio-allantoic membrane of 4 to 6-day chick embryos, in such a
 position as to prevent direct contact between embryonic and neoplastic
 tissues (Fig. 2). Embryonic and tumor tissues were, however, in reciprocal
connection through the circulatory system. The finding that these extra-embry-
onic transplants elicited the same effects as intraembryonic grafts gave definite
evidence for the diffusible nature of the tumoral nerve growth promoting factor
[12, 13].
    Attempts to replicate these effects by implanting dried tumor pellets or by
injecting extract of either sarcoma were unsuccessful. I then thought of resor-
ting to the tissue culture technique, which I had practiced with G. Levi at the
University of Turin. Lack of facilities in this field in the Department of Zoology
at Washington University, prompted me to ask hospitality from Professor
 Carlos Chagas, Director of the Biophysics Institute of the University of Brasil
 in Rio de Janeiro. There, a friend of mine, Hertha Meyer, had built and was
director of a most efficient tissue culture unit. Upon approval and invitation by
Professor Chagas, I boarded a plane for Rio de Janeiro, carrying in my
handbag two mice bearing transplants of mouse sarcomas 180 and 37.

The Nerve Growth Factor at its early in-vitro and in-vivo debut
 ‘The tumor had given a first hint of its existence in St. Louis, but it was in Rio
de Janeiro that it revealed itself, and it did so in a theatrical and grand way, as
if spurred by the bright atmosphere of that explosive and exuberant manifesta-
tion of life that is the Carnival in Rio” [14].


354                            Physiology or Medicine 1986


   The discovery of the growth response elicited by a soluble tumoral agent
revealed the receptivity of developing nerve cells to hitherto unknown humoral
factors and in this way opened a new area of investigation. The in vitro
bioassay offered a practical and invaluable tool for uncovering the identity card
of this factor and paved the way for the study of its mechanism of action. Ink
drawings, which I enclosed in several letters mailed from Rio to Viktor, give an
eloquent account of the spectacular way in which this still unknown agent
revealed itself. Sensory and sympathetic ganglia explanted from 8-day chick
embryos in a semi-solid medium in proximity to, but not in contact with,
fragments of mouse sarcoma 180 or 37 produced, in a 24 hour period, a halo of
nerve fibers of maximal density on the side facing the tumor [15] (Fig. 3). The
euphoric state elicited by this discovery was, however, soon dampened by the
discovery that normal mouse tissues, at variance with those of chick embryos,
induce a milder, but not substantially different effect from that of mouse
sarcomas. In retrospect, this should have alerted us to a novel and even more
 significant aspect of these in vitro experiments; namely, the widespread
 presence of the factor endowedwith nerve growth promoting activity in normal
and neoplastic tissues. The failure to realize the significance of this ‘mouse
effect’ was beneficial rather than detrimental, since for the next two years our
attention was entirety focussed on the study of the chemical nature of the factor
released by the two mouse sarcomas, in much larger quantities than from
normal mouse tissues.
   A young biochemist, Stanley Cohen, who joined our Group shortly before
my return from Rio, isolated from the two tumors a nucleoprotein fraction
endowed with the in vitro nerve growth promoting activity [16]. Chance,
rather than calculated search, signed a new, most fortunate turn of events. In
order to degrade the nucleic acids present in this active fraction, Stan made use
of snake venom which contains, among other enzymes, also the nucleic acid
degrading enzyme, phosphodiesterase. Its addition in minute amounts to the
nucleoprotein tumor fraction, was expected to suppress the formation of the
fibrillar halo if nucleic acids rather than the protein were responsible for the
nerve growth promoting effect elicited by this fraction. The startling result was
a marked increase in the density of the fibrillar halo around the ganglia
incubated in the presence of the tumoral fraction treated with snake venom.
Since a dense fibrillar halo was produced also around ganglia cultured in the
presence of minute amounts of snake venom alone, it became apparent that the
venom itself was a most potent source of nerve growth promoting activity. On
the basis of biochemical studies, Cohen was in fact able to show that equivalent
growth stimulation effects were obtained by 15,000 µg of a sarcoma 180
 homogenate and 6 µg of the moccasin snake venom. From the latter he isolated,
 after several purification steps, a non-dialyzable, heat-labile substance endowed
with nerve growth promoting activity, identified as a protein molecule with a
 molecular weight in the order of 20,000 [17,18]. Microgram quantities of the
 purified snake venom fraction endowed with nerve growth promoting property,
 injected daily into the yolk of 6 to 8-day chick embryos for a 3 to 5-day period,
 resulted in the overgrowth of sensory and sympathetic ganglia and excessive


                               The Nerve Growth Factor: Thirty-Five Years Later




                                                                                                      b




Figure 3. Drawings illustrating the in vitro “halo” effect on 8-day chick embryo sensory ganglia
culturedin the presence of fragments of mouse sarcoma 180 for 24 hours (b) or 48 hours (c). In (a),
the ganglion, which faces a fragment of chick embryonic tissue, shows fibroblasts but few nerve
fibers. In (b) and (c), the ganglia, facing fragments of sarcoma 180, show the typical “halo” effect
elicited by the growth factor released from the sarcoma. Note in (c) the first evidence of a
neurotropic effect of the growth factor.


356                                       Physiology or Medicine 1986


production of their fibers. Sympathetic nerve bundles branched profusely into
the viscera and protruded into the cavity of the veins, mimicking in all details
the effects elicited by grafts of mouse sarcomas [19].
  If chance brought to our attention the unforeseeable presence of two
nerve growth promoting sources, mouse sarcomas and snake venom, the sub




Figure 4. Diagrammatic representation of sympathetic fiber bundles which enter the spinal cord and
medulla oblongata from adjacent sympathetic ganglia in intracerebrally NGF injected neonatal
rats. Left half: control (C). Right half: experimental (E) embryo. NGF, site of      injection of NGF into
the floor of the fourth ventricle, lc, locus coeruleus; mo, medulla oblongata; sp, spinal cord; s,
sensory ganglia; sy, sympathetic ganglia. Sympathetic fibers run across the sensory ganglion and
enter into the neural tube with the dorsal roots. (from Ref. 40)


                        The Nerve Growth Factor: Thirty-Five Years Later             357



sequent finding that mouse submandibular salivary gland extract added in a
minute quantity to the culture medium elicits an even denser and more
compact fibrillar halo, was the result of a calculated search. These glands, as the
homologue of the snake venom glands, were chosen by Stanley Cohen [20] as
more likely that other organs screened with the in vitro bioassay, to store the
nerve growth factor (NGF). These results were soon followed by purification
and identification by Cohen of the salivary factor as a protein molecule with a
molecular weight of 44,000 [20]. Its availability in larger quantities than the
venom NGF, and its moderate toxicity when injected in a highly purified form,
made possible the exploration of its biological activity in neonatal, young and
adult mammals [21]. The results of these investigations signed the begin-
ning of an ever more extensive and systematic in vivo and in vitro analysis of the
salivary NGF, its chemical structure, as well as its mechanism and spectrum of
action. Only the most significant findings reported from several laboratories
in original and review articles will be considered in the following pages.

The vital role of NGF in the life of its target cells
In spite of, or perhaps because of its most unusual and almost extravagant
deeds in living organisms and in-vitro systems, NGF did not at first find
enthusiastic reception by the scientific community, as also indicated by the
reluctance of other investigators to engage in this line of research. The finding
that a protein molecule from such diverse and unrelated sources as mouse
sarcomas, snake venom and mouse salivary glands, elicited such a potent and
disrupting action on normal neurogenetic processes, did not fit into any con-
ceptual preexisting schemes, nor did it seem to bear any relationship to normal
control mechanisms at work during ontogenesis. It was in this skeptical atmos-
phere that NGF asserted, in a most forceful way, its vital role in the life of its
target cells. Previous in vitro experiments had shown that incubation of snake
venom with its antiserum inhibited the fiber outgrowth induced by the venom
NGF. A specific antiserum to salivary NGF likewise abolished the formation of
the in vitro fibrillar halo. These results suggested testing the effect of daily
injections of small amounts of this antiserum (AS-NGF) in neonatal rodents.
The inspection of treated mice, performed at the end of the first month with
stereo and optic microscopes, revealed the near total disappearance of sympa-
thetic para- and prevertebral chain ganglia [22-24]. This dramatic effect,
which deprives newborn rodents and other neonatal mammals injected with
antiserum to salivary NGF of the sympathetic system, without interfering with
their normal development and vitality, became known as immunosympathec-
tomy [25, 26]. Th e same treatment produces much less damaging effects in
young and adult animals.
   Two alternative hypotheses were submitted to explain the mechanism
underlying the destructive effects of the antiserum: 1) a complement-mediated
cytotoxic effect, or 2) inactivation of NGF or of an NGF-like protein
essential for differentiation and survival of sympathetic nerve cells. Although
the first hypothesis was favored in early articles, the second progressively
gained support and is now generally accepted on the basis of this and an in-


358                             Physiology or Medicine 1986


vitro experimental approach which provided additional, unequivocable eviden-
ce of the essential role NGF plays in the early differentiation stages of its target
cells. The in vitro experiments consisted of the dissociation of sensory and
 sympathetic nerve cells from ganglia of 8-11 day chick embryos and their
incubation in minimum essential media. Nerve cells failed to survive unless
nanogram quantities of NGF were added daily to the culture medium [27]. The
in vitro evidence for the role of NGF in the early phases of development of
sensory nerve cells, received confirmation from subsequent experiments which
proved that administration of NGF antiserum to rodent fetuses [28, 29] and
autoimmunization of pregnant rodents against endogenous NGF, [30] result in
failure of sensory ganglia to undergo normal development.


NGF as a retrograde trophic messenger and tropic factor
The evidence in favor of the hypothesis that immunosympathectomy results
from removal, by AS-NGF [31], f o circulating endogenous NGF, raised the
questions of how NGF reached its target cells and what were its sources of
production. Subsequent experimental pharmacological and surgical ap-
proaches provided satisfactory answers to both questions, and in view of the
interest in these problems, techniques and main findings will be briefly re-
ported.
   Administration to neonatal rodents of drugs such as 6-hydroxydopamine,
which destroys adrenergic nerve endings [32], or of vinblastine, which blocks
axonal transport [33], results in death of the large majority of sympathetic
nerve cells in their most active phase of differentiation and growth. The
degenerative effects produced by these drugs are of the same magnitude as
those produced by administration of AS-NGF and result in the destruction of
para- and prevertebral sympathetic ganglia through a process which became
known as chemical sympathectomy [32,33]. A third experimental manipula-
tion, consisting of the surgical transectomy of postganglionic axons of
superior cervical ganglion performed in neonatal rodents, results in death of
about 90% of immature sympathetic cells in this ganglion [34]. The experimen-
tal evidence that in all instances nerve cell death is prevented by an exogenous
supply of NGF [30,35-37] demonstrates the vital role played by this mole-
cule in the life and differentiation of these cells. The subsequent demonstra-
tion that labelled NGF is taken up by the nerve endings of sympathetic [38] or
sensory fibers [39] and is retrogradely transported to the cell perikarya, lent
strong support to the concept of NGF as a strophic messenger, conveyed
through nerve fibers from peripheral cells to the innervating neurons.
Disconnection of the partners by chemical or surgical axotomy results in death
of differentiating nerve cells deprived of this essential molecule.
   At the same time as the vital role of NGF in developing sympathetic and
sensory nerve cells was assessed and its regrograde transport from peripheral
tissues was well documented, another important property of NGF - its ability
to direct growing or regenerating axons of sensory and sympathetic fibers along
its concentration gradient (neutrotropism) - was definitely established through
different in vivo and in vitro experimental approaches [40-45].


                       The Nerve Growth Factor: Thirty-Five Years Later              359



   The first strong evidence for a NGF neurotropic effect was obtained from
experiments of daily micro-injections of NGF into the ‘floor of the fourth
ventricle. A 7-day treatment resulted in the penetration of fiber bundles origin-
ating from sympathetic ganglia inside the neural tube and in their ending at the
level of experimentally produced NGF pools [40-41] (Fig. 4). In vitro experi-
mental approaches gave more rigorous proof that neurites of NGF target cells
grow along a NGF concentration gradient and deflect their route according to
the changed position of the NGF releasing pipette [42]. While these studies
unequivocably establish the NGF neurotropic effect as independent from its
trophic action, they leave unanswered the question of whether this effect is
exerted via a local control of growth cone motility [43], altered adhesion of this
locomotor organelle to the substratum [44-45], or other mechanism(s) [46-
47].

Neuronal and non-neuronal target cells
As indicated in Table I, targets of NGF action that have been well character-
ized up to now, can be classified under three main categories: 1) neural-crest
derivatives, 2) central nervous system (CNS) neurons; and 3) cells of non-
neuronal origin. For a thorough analysis of the many and diversified effects
exerted by NGF on each one of these cells, the reader is referred to review
articles on this specific matter [47-52]. In this context I only wish to make
some general considerations.
   A generally valid rule is that all cells are maximally responsive to NGF
action during their early differentiation;        the response undergoes progressive
restriction in the adult without, however, being totally effaced. Long sympathe-
tic neurons and sensory neurons, with particular reference to those of the dorso-
medial quadrant of spinal ganglia in chick embryo [12], provided a most
valuable system for demonstrating the three main activities of NGF, i.e., 1) its
vital trophic role during the early developmental stages, 2) its property of
enhancing differentiative processes such as neurite outgrowth, and 3) of gu-
iding the growing or regenerating neurites along its own concentration gradient
 [43-44]. These same cells offered an in vivo model system to study the induction
of enzymes involved in neurotransmitter synthesis [53] and were also instrumen-
tal in providing the first demonstration of the retrograde transport of NGF [54]
and its role as a trophic messenger [55]. If sensory and sympathetic cells
played a key role in revealing these properties of NGF, chromaffiin cells and
their neoplastic counterpart, the clonal cell line PC12, became the model of
choice for studying the capacity of NGF to modulate the phenotypic expression
and molecular mechanism subserving this process [56]. The phenotypic
shift induced by NGF both in chromaffin [57-58] and PC12 cells [56,59],
resulting in their neuronal differentiation accompanied by a pletora of chemi-
cal, ultrastructural and morphological changes characteristic of the neuronal
rather than glandular phenotype, is too well known to warrant a detailed
description [50]. These cells, moreover, uncovered the startling capacity of
NGF to act both as a mitogenic [60] and a antimitotic agent [56], even within
the context of the same clonal cell line PC12 and of a mutatedversion of it [61].


360                             Physiology or Medicine 1986


This, in turn, clearly pointed to the ‘versatility’ of NGF receptors and of their
transduction machinery, whose message is evidently read and interpreted in
different ways according to the cell type and previous cell history. The ‘priming
model’ prospected to give a molecular account for the very fast and very slow
onset of neurite outgrowth occurring, respectively, in sensory and sympathetic
cells [24] on the one hand and PC12 cells on the other [50], is an excellent
example of the contribution of these latter cells to studies on the mode of
action of NGF.
   Other examples of the wide and at the same time diversified NGF effects are
illustrated by other sympatho-adrenal derivatives such as paraganglia, small
intensely fluorescent cells (SIF)    and carotid body cells [62-64]. A particularly
impressive evidence of the capacity of NGF to modulate phenotypic expression
is the case of SIF cells which have been hypothesized as immediate precursors
of both sympathetic and chromaffin cells. When these cells are cultured under
appropriate conditions, they can be channelled towards the first or the second
phenotype in media supplied with NGF or with dexamethasone [63,64]. Such
an interplay, even in fully differentiated cells, between NGF and steroid hor-
mones, is also indirectly suggested by in vivo studies on the short adrenergic
neurons which innervate the genito-urinary system in both sexes [65].
    In more recent years, two new populations came to the forefront of studies on
NGF target cells: CNS neurons and cells originating from the hematopoietic
system.
    Small and large neuronal populations located in different brain areas have
been shown to exhibit all properties and responses typical of sensory and
sympathetic cells, such as: 1) the presence of specific receptors [66], 2) retro-
grade transport of NGF [67], 3)          increased neurotransmitter synthesis with
special reference to acetylcholine [68-70],        and 4) trophic response manifested
as protection by exogenous NGF administration to selective noxious treatments
or surgical transection otherwise leading to cell death [71,72]. A role for NGF
in the development of as yet unidentified hypothalamic brain centers has been
suggested by the finding that injections of affinity purified polyclonal antibo-
dies against NGF in rat fetuses induce a severe postnatal neuroendocrine
syndrome [29]. The loop of an unquestionable NGF role in brain is completed
by the demonstration that other nerve cells, especially those located in the
hippocampus and cortical areas, manufacture large quantities of NGF mRNA
and NGF protein, thus closing the functional link between NGF-producing
and NGF-responding cells [73-75]. As prospected in the last section of this
article, although the range of NGF action in the CNS is qualitatively compa-
rable to that previously observed in peripheral neurons, the actual extent of the
NGF role in brain is far from foreseeable due to the vast repertoire of possible
responses from nerve cells in the CNS.
    An analogous general consideration holds for the effect exerted by NGF on
mast cells and possibly on other cells of the immune system. The increased in-
vivo and in vitro number of mast cells following NGF treatment [76,77], as
well as the effect of this growth factor on histamine release [78-80], point to an
unquestionable role in the physiology of these cells. It is not yet clear, however,


                       The Nerve Growth Factor: Thirty-Five Years Later             361




whether such an effect is exerted through a generalized action on all mast cell
precursors or through a sort of clonal selection mechanisti. The more recent
report of an NGF effect on other spleen cells, such as mononuclear cells [8l],
and the existence of NGF receptors on thymocytes [82], clearly suggests that the
NGF action extends also to cells belonging to a network of enormous functional
significance. The role played by histamine as an immunomodulator and the
obvious involvement of spleen cells in the immune response of the organism
prospect new scenarios in which NGF may gain access, not through a back
door, but through the main entrance.

 The I.D. card of NGF
Sequencing of mouse submandibular gland NGF, achieved in 1971 [83], provi-
ded invaluable information not only on its primary structure but was recently
instrumental in the preparation of synthetic oligonucleotides which resulted in
the identification of NGF cDNA [84]. The cloning which followed in rapid
succession of mouse [84], human [85], bovine [86] and chick [87] genes,
demonstrated their high degree of homology. The NGF gene, located in the
human species on the proximal short arm of chromosome 1 [88], codes for a
large polypeptide of 307 amino acid residues which, upon cleavage(s), gives
 rise to the 118 amino acid mature NGF subunit protein and, possibly, to
 other peptides of unknown function and with no sequence homology with
 presently identified proteins [84]. NGF is a dimer composed of two identical
 subunits held together by non-covalent bonds. The dimer can be isolated as such
 [89] or under the form of a complex also consisting of two other proteins, one
with an esteropeptidase activity, probably involved in the processing of an NGF
precursor, and the other with an as yet unknown function [90-92]. While it
remains to be established whether each NGF subunit is biologically active, it
has been demonstrated that a covalently cross-linked form of the dimer mainta-
ins full activity [91,92]. Between the two well-indentified molecular entities of
NGF and of its coding gene, which can be visualized as the summit and the
base of an iceberg, are several other possible intermediate forms of unknown
nature and biological properties. Their identification would answer important
questions such as: Are other biologically active peptides coded for by the NGF
gene? What is the significance of different splicing in different cells of NGF
mRNA [93]? Is the processing of pre-pro-NGF identical in all neuronal and
non-neuronal cells or, as in other peptides [94], do alternate processing path-
ways result in the production of peptides endowed with different biological
functions? Since the same peptides may undergo post-transcriptional or post-
translational modification, the submerged areas of the NGF iceberg loom very
large.
    Studies on the immunological and biological relatedness of NGFs purified
 from different species strongly support the hypothesis that the site(s) of inte-
raction with their receptors has remained structurally more constant than is the
case for other epitopes, probably free to mutate in view of their less fundamen-
tal biological functions [95].


362                            Physiology or Medicine 1986


NGF, growth factor and oncogenes
The discovery of NGF, soon followed by that of Epidermal Growth Factor
(EGF), led to the biological identification of an ever-growing list of polypeptide
growth factors [48]. In the seventies, another apparently unrelated area of
biology came to the forefront of research with the discovery of single gene
products (oncogenes) causing transformation. Polypeptide Growth Factors
 (PGF) and oncogene research, pursued at first independently of each other,
converged when homology between some oncogenes and growth factors or
their receptors was shown by sequence analysis. Evidence is steadily increas-
ing that excessive synthesis, or an altered version of PGFs or of their receptors,
may result in transformation of recipient cells [95-98]. More recently, the
demonstration that the opposite is also true, namely, that certain oncogene
products may induce differentiation of recipient cells, called attention to an-
other facet of this intricate interplay between differentiative and transforming
processes. The case of H-ras and that of v-src, whose expression into PC12 cells
[99,100] result in mitotic arrest and neuronal differentiation comparable to
those elicited by NGF, provide instances of a list most likely to grow. The
obvious conclusion is that a given polypeptide growth factor, or intracellular
proteins playing essential roles in the cell cycle or in differentiation of some
cells, may exert markedly different actions in distinct cell types. In the case of
NGF, one wonders if and how other actions are elicited by this versatile
molecule. For instance, is an altered version of NGF or of its receptors capable
of causing transformation of some recipient cells, as has been shown for other
PGFs? If this is the case, could NGF in a modified version or its receptors be
implicated in neoplasia in the central and peripheral nervous systems?

NGF in exocrine glands: a fortuitous presence or a biological function?
The early discovery that mouse submandibular glands synthesize and release
large quantities of NGF into the saliva, that the synthesis of this protein
molecule is under the control of testosterone and of thyroxine [101,102] and
that the NGF protein content is about ten-fold higher in male than in female
mice, remained for about three decades a puzzling and unexplained finding.
The conflicting but altogether negative attempts to reveal the presence of this
molecule in the circulating blood [49,51],      and the lack of any adverse effects on
sympathetic and sensory cells by removal of these glands, which deprived these
rodents of such a large NGF source,           militated against the hypothesis that
salivary NGF gains access to their target cells. An alternative biological func-
tion for salivary NGF was first hypothesized by our group [103], and recently
proved by us [104] and another investigator [105]. We demonstrated that
intraspecific fighting, experimentally induced in adult male mice by 6-9 weeks
of social isolation, results in massive NGF release into the blood stream, an
event prevented by previous sialoadenectomy. Since injections of NGF induce
weight and size increase of the adrenal glands [105] and stimulate the synthesis
of the catecholamine key enzyme, TH [106],        we suggested that such a massive
discharge into the blood circulation of endogenous salivary NGF may be
instrumental in the defence and/or offense mechanisms of vital significance for


                        The Nerve Growth Factor: Thirty-Five Years Later               363



male mice that engage in intraspecific lighting among individuals of the same
sex. In favor of this hypothesis, is a recent report that aggressive behavior
results in the release into the blood of another biologically active protein, renin,
synthesized in the same tubular portions of these glands [107]. The mechanism
triggering this NGF release is not yet understood, nor is it known whether
other stations are activated and play a role in this specific stress syndrome.
   As for the presence of large NGF sources in snake venom [18] and male
genital organs [108,109], they may be conceived as instances of bizarre
evolutionary gene expression. Alternatively, in these cases NGF may subserve
other functions which may somehow be linked with the poisonous action of
snake venom, or the reproductive activity of the genital apparatus. In the case
of snake venom, one can envisage the possibility that a highly specific neurotro-
pit molecule such as NGF is utilized by reptiles as a carrier of other neurotox-
ins devoid of specific receptors in the central and peripheral nervous systems.
For instance, enzymes such as phospholipases, phosphodiesterases and prote-
ases of various nature, which by themselves may lack specific recognition sites
in target cells, may exploit NGF as a carrier to gain access inside cells wherever
there are specific NGF receptors. The widespread distribution of these specific
molecules also in several non-neuronal cells could offer some toxins or enzymes
a better access to their target organs.
   In the reproductive tract, NGF could participte in fertilization mechanisms
by cytoskeletal mediated activation of spermatozoa locomotion much in the
same way as in neurite outgrowth, or by favoring egg implantation, via inhibi-
tion of rejection through the immune system. This latter hypothesis is presently
under investigation (Geraci, Cocchiara and Calissano) by assessing the effect of
NGF on uterine mast cells which, through histamine release, are postulated to
prevent the local immune reaction [110].

Foreseeable approaches and predictions of the unpredictable
The most obvious among the foreseeable approaches is the search for other
NGF target cells, using the ever more sophisticated in vivo and in vitro tech-
niques which became available in these last decades. It was this multimodal
approach which in recent years led to the discovery of NGF target cells in the
CNS of lower and higher vertebrates and in cell lineages playing a role in the
immune system. This list is likely to increase, as the search extends to other
neuronal and non-neuronal cell populations. Furthermore, one should take into
account the fact that some of these populations are receptive to NGF mainly
during developmental stages in prenatal life. This was already demonstrated in
sensory cells of avian and mammalian species [49,51,52], and in cells lining
the third ventricle in amphibian tadpoles [111] and prenatal and neonatal
rodents (Aloe and Levi-Montalcini, unpublished observations). Likewise, the
systematic screening of neuroendocrine and hematopoietic cell lines in
in vitro and in vivo systems may reveal other as yet uncovered roles of
this growth factor.
   Another approach now in progress in many laboratories is the search NGF-
like factors active on other neuronal populations. These factors may be subdivi-


364                            Physiology or Medicine I986


ded into two major classes: 1) those coded by the NGF gene itself but processed
through alternate post-transcriptional or post-translational pathways leading
to PGFs with a somewhat different structure and function: 2) other proteins or
peptides having the trophic,       chemotactic and/or differentiative activity of
NGF, but coded by other genes.
   The search for factors belonging to the first group and their identification
will take advantage of the techniques of molecular biology and immunology.
These should provide valuable information on some of the still unexplored,
submerged areas of the NGF iceberg, dealing with the processes of the NGF
gene transcription or translation. Of particular importance would be the identi-
fication of the NGF sequence responsible for its binding to receptors which may
presumably trigger a given cellular response [47]. As previously surmised,
[95], this portion has possibly been better conserved than other parts of the
molecule. Once identified, it will be feasible to introduce, in its synthetic
counterpart, amino acid substitutions and/or chemical modifications and ex-
plore the biological potency of the newly manufactured peptide. This approach
should not only provide invaluable information on the nature and properties of
the NGF active center, but, hopefully, will result in the synthesis of peptides
endowed with an activity even higher than that of NGF itself, so brilliantly
achieved in the field of other biologically active peptides [112, 113].
   Within this category of studies on NGF and its coding gene, one can conceive
a strategy aimed at exploiting the property of non-neuronal cells in peripheral
tissues and of neurons and satellites in the CNS to manufacture and release
NGF by resorting to pharmacological agents that modify NGF gene expression
or processing. The well-established findings that NGF synthesis is increased
following transection of nerve fibers connecting NGF receptive nerve cells to
their targets [114] or via hormonal action [101,102], are an additional indica-
tion of the remarkable plasticity of the mechanisms controlling the expression
of the NGF gene. It is conceivable that this property might be modulated by
pharmacological agents acting on the same path as those involved in the
regulation of the synthesis and release of NGF.
   The search for neurotrophic factors coded by genes other than the NGF gene
could take advantage, at least in its main lines, of the classical approach so
successfully applied in the isolation and identification of NGF. Two main
causes may explain why extensive work invested in this attempt has not been so
successful in providing evidence for the existence of other PGFs activating
different neuronal cell lines: 1) the lack of fast and reliable bioassays such as
those developed for NGF and 2) the failure to detect large sources of these
factors comparable to those fortuitously discovered in early NGF studies. The
availability of rapid, highly reliable bioassays can, however, now be achieved
by resorting to the use of most stringent, chemically defined media, permitting
survival and differentiation of only given cell types, upon addition to the
medium of putative growth factors extracted from different sources and scre-
ened with the in vitro bioassay for their potential specific growth enhancing
activity. The problem of finding by sheer chance large sources of NGF-like
peptides, such as those which played a key role in the discovery of NGF, can be


                       The Nerve Growth Factor: Thirty-Five Years Later           365



 solved by resorting to techniques of protein chemistry and recombinant DNA
 technology. A few micrograms of purified protein are sufficient to decipher the
 sequence, prepare the corresponding cDNAs, identify the gene of the PGF in
question, and express it in bacteria, thus replacing a search once guided by
unpredictable strokes of luck, with a rational and systematic strategy.
    Predictions of the unpredictable are encouraged by the same history of NGF
which may be defined as a long sequence of unanticipated events which each
time resulted in a new turn in the NGF unchartered route, and opened new
vistas on an ever-changing panorama. This trend, which became manifest from
the very beginning and in fact alerted me to the existence of NGF, is perhaps
the most attractive, even though elusive trait of this thirty-live year long
adventure. One can at present only predict where future developments are
most likely to occur. The main causes of unpredictability of the findings, reside
in the intricacy of the new surroundings where NGF is moving - the CNS and
the immune system-rather than in NGF itself. The enormous complexity of
these two networks, which on the basis of recent findings are closely interrela-
ted and influence each other through bidirectional signals [115,116], opens
endless possibilities for NGF activation of distinct repertoires of cells belonging
to one or the other system. How many indirect effects can be elicited by direct
NGF action on cholinergic, adrenergic and peptidergic neurons interlinked via
fiber pathways and humoral channels or through short-distance diffusion?
Likewise, how many effects could follow the simple histamine release by NGF
activated mast cells, considering the well-established role of this amine as an
immunomodulator or an immunosuppressor? These considerations hold also
for the potential utilization of NGF in brain and immunosystem disorders. For
instance, whenever cell death of specific neuronal populations may be linked to
a decreased local availability of neurotrophic factors, such as NGF, its exogeno-
us supply or stimulation of its endogenous production via pharmacological
agents may offer a promising approach to presently incurable diseases.
    I shall end this account of the unfolding of the NGF story with a remark
made more than a decade ago by Viktor Hamburger: “- - - the fact that this
discovery, which grew out of a seemingly peripheral problem (peripheral in
every sense of the word), has blazed so many new trails is its greatest contribu-
 tion in neuroembryology” [117]. Studies in this last decade have not only
provided new strong evidence of the most important contributions of NGF in
 the field of neuroembryology, but brought to the fore its significance in the
more general field of neuroscience and also prospect its role in that of the
immune system.
    I dedicate this article to Viktor Hamburger, who promoted and took part in
 this search, and to whom I am forever indebted for invaluable suggestions and
generosity. Without him, the Nerve Growth Factor would never have come to
our attention.
    To my dear friends, Pietro Calissano and Luigi Aloe, I wish to express my
deepest gratitude for their fundamental contributions. In this thirty-five year
long investigation, a large number of colleagues, research associates and gradu-
ate students took part in this scientific adventure. I am particularly indebted


366                            Physiology or Medicine I986


and I very gratefully acknowledge the most important work performed by two
of them: Drs. Piero Angeletti and Vincenzo Bocchini. To Professor Carlos
Chagas, for his generous hospitality in the Biophysic Institute of the University
of Brasil, and to Dr. Hertha Meyer who helped me in devising the tissue culture
bioassay of NGF, my warmest thanks.


                        The Nerve Growth Factor: Thirty-Five Years Later                367



REFERENCES
 1. Medawar P. B., in The Art of the Soluble, (Methuen & Co., LTD, 1967) pp. 106-
     107.
 2. Harrison R. G., Proc. Roy. Soc. London Series B 118, 155- 196 (1935).
 3. Hamburger V., J. Exp. Zool., 68,449-494 (1934).
 4. Tello J. F., Trabajos Lab. Invest. Biol. Univ. Madrid 21, l-93 (1922).
 5. Levi-Montalcini R., Prog. Brain Res. 4, l-29 (1964).
 6. Levi-Montalcini R., Levi G., Arch. Biol. Liege 54, 183-206 (1943).
 7. Hamburger V., Levi-Montalcini R., J. Exp. Zool. 111, 457-502 (1949).
 8. Levi-Montalcini R., J. Comp. Neurol. 91, 209-242 (1949).
 9. Levi-Montalcini R., J. Morphol. 86, 256-283 (1950).
10. Bueker E. D., Anat. Rec. 102, 369-390 (1948).
11. Levi-Montalcini R., Hamburger V., J. Exp. Zool. 116, 321-362 (1951).
12. Levi-Montalcini R., Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 55, 330-343 (1952).
13. Levi-Montalcini R., Hamburger V., J. Exp. Zool. 123, 233-288 (1953).
14. Levi-Montalcini R., in The Neurosciences: Paths of Discovery, F. G. Worden, J. P.
     Swayzey, G. Adelman, Eds. (MIT Press, 1975), pp. 245-265.
15. Levi-Montalcini R., Meyer H., Hamburger V., Cancer Res. 14, 49-57 (1954).
16. Cohen S., Levi-Montalcini R., Hamburger V., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 40,
     1014-1018 (1954).
17. Cohen S., Levi-Montalcini R., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 42, 571-574 (1956).
18. Cohen S., J. Biol. Chem. 234, 1129-1137 (1959).
19. Levi-Montalcini R., Cohen S., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 42, 695-699 (1956).
20. Cohen S., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 46, 302-311 (1960).
21. Levi-Montalcini R., Booker B., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 46, 373-384 (1960).
22. Levi-Montalcini R., Booker B., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 46, 384-391 (1960).
23. Levi-Montalcini R., Science 143, 105-110 (1964).
24. Levi-Montalcini R., The Harvey Lectures 60, 217-219 ( 1966)
25. Levi-Montalcini R., Angeletti P. U., Pharmacol. Rev. 18, 819-828 (1966).
26. Steiner G., Schönbaum E. Eds., Immunosympathectomy (Elsevier Publishing
     Co., Amsterdam, 1972).
27. Levi-Montalcini R., Angeletti P. U., Dev. Biol. 7, 653-659 (1963).
28. Levi-Montalcini R., Aloe L., Calissano P., Cozzari C., in 1st Meeting of the
     Internatl. Society for Dev. Neuroscience, Strasbourg, vol. 1, pp. 5 (1980).
29. Aloe L., Cozzari C., Calissano P., Levi-Montalcini R., Nature 291, 413-415
     (1981).
30. Johnson E.M., Gorin P.D., Brandeis L.D., Pearson J.. Science 210, 916-918
     (1980).
31. Goedert M., Otten U., Schaefer T., Schwab M., Thoenen H., Brain Res. 201,
     399-409 (1980).
32. Angeletti P. U., Levi-Montalcini R., Proc., Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 65, 114- 121
     (1970).
33. Calissano P., Monaco G., Menesini-Chen M. G., Chen J. S., Levi-Montalcini R.,
     in Contractile Systems in Non-muscle Tissue, S. W. Perry, A. Margret, R. S.
     Adelstein, Eds. (Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1976a), pp. 201-211.
34. Hendry I.A., Brain Res. 90, 235-244 (1975).
35. Levi-Montalcini R., Aloe L., Mugnaini E., Oesch F., Thoenen H., Proc. Natl.
     Acad. Sci. USA 72, 595-599 (1975).
36. Hendry I. A., and Campbell, J. J. of Neurocytol. 5, 351-360 (1976).
37. Aloe L., Mugnaini E., Levi-Montalcini R., Arch. Ital. Biol. 113, 326-353 (1975).
38. Stöckel K., Paravicini U., Thoenen H., Brain Res. 76, 413-421 (1974).
39. Hamburger V., Brunso-Bechtold V. J. K., Yip J. W., J. Neurosci. 1, 60-71 (1981).
40. Levi-Montalcini R., Prog. Brain Res. 45, 235-258 (1976).
41. Menesini-Chen M. L., Chen J. S., Levi-Montalcini R., Arch. Ital. Biol. 116, 53-84
     (1978).


368                              Physiology or Medicine I986


42. Gundersen R. W., Barrett J. N., Science 206, 1079-1080 (1979).
43. Gundersen R. W., Barrett J. N., J. Cell Biol. 87, 546-554 (1980).
44. Campenot R. B., Dev. Biol. 93, 1-12 (1982).
45. Campenot R.B., Dev. Biol. 93, 13-41 (1982).
46. Pfenninger K. H., Johnson M. P., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 78, 7797-7800
     (1981).
47. Calissano P., Cattaneo A., Aloe L., Levi-Montalcini R., in Hormonal Proteins and
     Peptides, C. H. Li, Ed. (Academic Press, 1984), Vol. XII, pp. l-56.
48. Bradshaw R.A., Annu. Rev. Biochem. 47, 191-216 (1978).
49. Thoenen H., Barde Y. A., Physiol. Rev. 60, 1284-1335 (1980).
50. Greene L.A., Shooter E. M., Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 3, 353-402 (1980).
51. Calissano P., Cattaneo A., Biocca S., Aloe L., Mercanti D., Levi-Montalcini R.,
     Exp. Cell Res. 154, l-9 (1984).
52. Levi-Montalcini R., Calissano P., Trends Neurosci. 9, 473-476 (1986).
53. Thoenen H., Angeletti P. U., Levi-Montalcini R., Kettler R., Proc. Natl. Acad.
     Sci. USA 68, 1598-1602 (1971).
54. Paravicini U., Stoeckel K., Thoenen H., Brain Res. 84, 279-291 (1975).
55. Johnson E. M., Yip H. K., Nature 314, 751-753 (1985).
56. Greene L. A., Tischler A. S., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 73, 2424-2428 (1976).
57. Unsicker K., Krisch B., Otten U., Thoenen H., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sri. USA 75,
     3498-3502 (1978).
58. Aloe L., Levi-Montalcini R., Proc. Natl. Acad.Sci. USA 76, 1246-1250 (1979).
59. Greene L. A., Liem R. K. H., Shelanski M. L., J. Cell Biol. 96, 76-83 (1983).
60. Lillien L. E., Claude P., Nature 317, 632-634 (1985).
61. Burnstein, D. E., Greene L. A., Dev. Biol. 94, 477-482 (1982).
62. Levi-Montalcini R., Aloe L., Adv. Biochem. Psychopharmacol. 25, 3-16 (1980).
63. Doupe A. J., Patterson P. H., Landis S.C., J. Neurosci. 5, 2143-2160 (1985).
64. Doupe A. J., Landis S. C., Patterson P. H., J. Neurosci. 5, 2119-2142 (1985).
65. Owman C., Sjoberg N. O., in Proceedings of the 5th International Congress of
     Endocrinology, V. H. T. James, Ed. (Excerpta Medica, Amsterdam, 1977), vol. I,
     pp. 205-209.
66. Szutowicz A., Frazier W.A., Bradshaw R.A., J. Biol. Chem. 251, 1516-1523
     (1976).
67. Seiler M., Schwab M., Brain Res. 30, 33-39 (1984).
68. Gnahn H., Hefti F., Heumann R., Schwab M. E., Thoenen H., Dev. Brain Res. 9,
     45-52 (1983).
69. Hefti F., Dravid A., Hartikka J., Brain Res. 293, 305-311 (1984).
70. Mobley W. C., Rutkowski J. L., Tennekoon G. I., Buchanan K., Johnston M. V.,
     Science 229, 284-287 (1985).
71. Williams L. P., Varon S., Peterson G. M., Wictorin K., Fischer W., Bjorklund A.,
     Gage F. H., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 83, 9231-9235 (1986).
72. Kromer L. F., Science 235, 214-216 (1987).
73. Korsching S., Auburger G., Heumann R., Scott J., Thoenen H., EMBO J. 4,
     1389-1393 (1985).
74. Shelton D. L., Reichardt L. F., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 83, 2714-2718 (1986).
75. Whittemore S. R., Ebendal T., Lärkfors L., Olson L., Seiger A., Stromberg I.,
     Persson H., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 83, 817-821 (1986).
76. Aloe L., Levi-Montalcini R., Brain Res. 133, 358-366 (1977).
77. Böhm A., Aloe L., Acad. Naz. dei Lincei 80, l-6 (1986).
78. Bruni A., Bigon E., Boarato E., Leon A., Toffano G., FEBS Lett. 138, 190-192
     (1982).
79. Sugiyama K., Suzuki Y., Furuta H., Arch. Oral. Biol. 30, 93-95 (1985).
80. Mazurek N., Weskamp G., Erne P., Otten U., FEBS Lett. 198, 315-320 (1986).
81. Thorpe L. W., Werrbach-Perez K., Perez-Polo J. R., 2° Internatl. Workshop on
     Neuroimmunomodulation, Dubrovnik, Abstract, pp. 151 (1986).


                          The Nerve Growth Factor: Thirty-Five Years Later                 369



 82. Cattaneo A., Secher D. S., Exp. Cell Res. (in press).
 83. Hogue-Angeletti R., Bradshaw R. A., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 68, 2417-2420
      (1971).
 84. Scott J., Selby M., Urdea M., Quiroga M., Bell G., Rutter W.J., Nature 302,
      538-540 (1983).
 85. Ullrich, A., Gray A., Berman C., Dull T. J., Nature 303, 821-823 (1983).
 86. Meier R., Becker-Andre M., Gotz R., Heumann R., Shaw A., Thoenen H., EMBO
     J. 5, 1489-1493 (1986).
 87. Ebendal T., Larhammar D., Persson H., EMBO J. 5, 1483-1487 (1986).
 88. Francke V., De Martinville B., Coussens L., Ullrich A., Science 222, 1248-1250
      (1983).
 89. Bocchini V., Angeletti P. U., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 64, 787-792 (1969).
 90. Varon S., Nomura J., Shooter E. M., Biochemistry 6, 2202-2210 (1967).
 91. Varon S., Nomura J., Shooter E. M., Biochemistry 7, 1296-1303 (1968).
 92. Stach R. W., Shooter E. M., J. Biol. Chem. 249, 6668-6674 (1974).
 93. Edwards R. H., Selby M. J., Rutter W. J., Nature 319, 784-787 (1986).
 94. Eipper B.A., Mains R. E., Herbert E., Trends Neurosci. 100, 463-467 (1986).
 95. Doolittle R., Hunkapiller M. W., Hood L. E., DeVare S.G., Robbins K. L.,
      Aaronson S. A., Antoniades H. N., Science 221, 275-276 (1983).
 96. Downward J., Yraden Y., Mayes E., Scrace G., Totty N., Stockwell P., Ullrich A.,
      Schlessinger J., Waterfield M. D., Nature 307, 521-527 (1984).
 97. Sherr C. J., Retternmier C. W., Sacca R., Roussel M. F., Look T. A., Stanley E. R.,
      Cell 41, 665-676 (1985).
 98. Weinberger C., Hollenberg S. M., Rosenfeld M. G., Evans R. M., Nature 318,
      670-673 (1985).
 99. Bar-Sagi D., Feramisco J. R., Cell 42, 841-848 (1985).
100. Alemà S., Casalbore P., Agostini E., Tatò, F., Nature 316, 557-559 (1985).
101. Levi-Montalcini R., Angeletti P. U., in Salivary Glands and their Secretions, L. M.
      Sreebny, J. Meyer, Eds. (Pergamon, Oxford, 1964), pp. 129-141.
102. Aloe L., Levi-Montalcini R., Exp. Cell Res. 125, 15-22 (1980a).
103. Aloe L., Cozzari C., Levi-Montalcini R., Brain Res. 332, 259-265 (1985).
104. Aloe L., Alleva E., Böhm A., Levi-Montalcini R., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 83,
      6184-6187 (1986).
105. Lakshmanan J., Am. J. Physiol. 250, E 386-391 (1986).
106. Otten U., Schwab M., Gagnon C., Thoenen H., Brain Res. 133, 291-303 (1977).
107. Bing J., Poulsen K., Hackenthal E., Rix E., Taugner R., J. Histochem. Cytochem.
      28, 874-880 (1980).
108. Harper G. P., Barde Y.A., Burnstock G., Carstairs J. R., Dennison M. E., Suda
      K., Vernon C. A., Nature 279, 160-162 (1979).
109. Harper G. P., Thoenen H., J. Neurochem. 34, 893-903 (1980).
110. Beer D.J., Matloff S. M., Rocklin R.E., Adv. Immunol. 35, 209-215 (1984).
111. Levi-Montalcini R., Aloe L., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 82, 7111-7115 (1985).
112. Kaiser E. T., Lawrence D. S., Science 226, 505-511 (1984).
113. Rajashekhar B., Kaiser E.T., J. Biol. Chem. 261, 13617-13623 (1986).
114. Ebendal T., Olson L., Seiger A., Hedlund K. O., Nature 286, 25-28 (1980).
115. Roszman T. L., Jackson J. C., Cross R. J., Titus M. J.., Markesbery W. R., Brooks
      W. H., J. Immunol. 135, 769s-772 (1985).
116. Hall N. R., McGillis U. P., Spangelo B. L., Goldstein A. L., J. Immunol. 135,
      806-811.
117. Hamburger V., Perspectives in Biol. and Med. 18, 162-178 (1975).
