                       R   OBERT   W . HO L L E Y


                     Alanine transfer RNA
                    Nobel Lecture, December, 12, 1968


Work on the alanine transfer RNA actually began in 1956 in James Bonner’s
laboratories at the California Institute of Technology. I was on sabbatical
leave from the Geneva Experiment Station of Cornell University and was
studying protein synthesis. Toward the end of my leave I carried out experi-
ments designed to detect the acceptor of activated amino acids.
   At that time it was already known from the work of Hoagland, Keller and
Zamecnik 1, DeMoss, Genuth and Novelli2, and Berg and Newtons that
amino acids are activated enzymatically to give enzyme- bound amino acyl-
adenylates (Enz-AA-AMP, Fig. 1). It seemed likely that these amino acyl-
adenylates would react with something, indicated as <X> in Fig. 1, and one
product of the reaction would be AMP (adenosine 5’ -monophosphate), as
formulated in the second equation in Fig. 1. It seemed quite possible that such




               Fig. 1. Schematic representation of amino acid activation.
a reaction would be reversible, and if so, it might be possible to detect the
overall back reaction as an incorporation of radioactive AMP into ATP that
required amino acids. Using this approach, analanine-dependent incorpora-
tion of AMP into ATP was found in the "pH 5 enzyme" prepared from the
low molecular weight, "soluble" fraction of rat liver homogenate. Of great-
est interest was the finding that the AMP incorporation was inhibited by
ribonuclease 4. Subsequently, this alanine-dependent AMP incorporation
system was reconstructed by combining a partially purified alanine-activating
enzyme with low molecular weight RNA prepared from rat liver "pH 5
enzyme"5.
  In the meantime it was shown by Hoagland et al. 6, and by Ogata and No-
hara7 that radioactive amino acids became bound to a low molecular weight
RNA in a rat-liver "pH 5 enzyme" preparation. The RNA was referred to as
                                                     8
"soluble RNA" and is now known as "transfer RNA" . Thus it became clear
that the acceptor of activated amino acids was a low molecular weight RNA.


                         ALANINE TRANSFER RNA                                  325
   The work of Zachau, Acs and Lipmann , and Hecht, Stephenson and Za-
                                             9



mecnik 10 showed that all of the activated amino acids became attached to a
terminal adenosine residue in transfer RNA. Since different amino acids did
not compete for the same attachment site6,11 , it seemed likely that different
transfer RNA’s were serving as acceptors for the different amino acids.
   For a chemist, the existence of amino acid-specific, low molecular weight
RNA’s was very intriguing. It seemed possible that these RNA’s might be
small enough to permit detailed structural studies. This would be of great in-
terest because it is the nucleotide sequences of nucleic acids that provide speci-
ficity and enable nucleic acids to carry out their many vital functions.




When transfer RNA’s are extracted from cells, a mixture is obtained that con-
tains at least one transfer RNA for each of the 20 different amino acids in-
volved in protein synthesis. For detailed structural analysis, a highly purified
transfer RNA was needed; therefore, in 1958, at the U. S. Plant, Soil and Nu-
trition Laboratory, a U. S. Department of Agriculture Laboratory at Cornell
University, we set out to try to isolate an individual transfer RNA for chemi-
cal study.
   Our first problem was to find a fractionation technique that was applicable
to transfer RNA’s Various procedures were investigated, and the Craig
                                         12
countercurrent distribution technique was found to be promising. In col-
laboration with J. Apgar, B. P. Doctor and S. H. Merrill13,14 , the counter-
current distribution procedure was developed, over a period of four years,
into the first generally applicable method for the fractionation of transfer
RNA’s. Fig. 2 shows the results of a countercurrent distribution of bulk yeast
transfer RNA. Yeast transfer RNA was used because it is readily obtained in
large quantity15. By repeated countercurrent distribution of the most active
fractions obtained in Fig. 2, three of the transfer RNA’s, the alanine, tyrosine,
and valine RNA’s, were obtained in a relatively homogeneous form and es-
sentially free of activity as acceptors of other amino acids 14. The results with
the alanine RNA are shown in Fig. 3. The excellent correlation between the
experimental curves and the calculated theoretical distribution curve, shown
in Fig. 3, encouraged us to believe that the RNA was pure enough for struc-
tural analysis. Nevertheless, to undertake structural work was a gamble, since
there was the possibility that the preparation might not be pure, or that it


326                      1968 ROBERT W. HOLLEY




Fig. 2. 200-Transfer countercurrent distribution of 500 mg of bulk yeast transfer RNA
                                    (from ref.14).

might be a mixture of different molecular species, all of which accepted ala-
nine. Since attempts to fractionate the material further were unsuccessful,
there seemed no alternative but to gamble a few years of work on the problem
hoping that the material was sufficiently pure for structural analysis. If the
starting material was impure, we could expect that attempts at structural
analysis would lead to hopeless confusion. Fortunately this was not the out-
come.




Fig. 3. 875-Transfer countercurrent distribution of redistributed alanine transfer RNA
                                     (from ref.14).


                        ALANINE TRANSFER RNA                                327
   Throughout our structural studies the amount of purified alanine transfer
RNA available for study was very limited. The scale of the isolation proce-
dure was increased tenfold over that in Fig. 3, by using a large countercurrent
apparatus in combination with a modified solvent system that increased the
solubility of the RNA. Nevertheless, the supply of purified RNA available for
individual experiments was always limited to tens of milligrams. Therefore,
to the extent possible, the experiments were designed to use the minimum
amount of RNA. During the three years of work on the structure of the ala-
nine transfer RNA, we used a total of 1 g of highly purified material. This was
isolated in our laboratories from approximately 200 g of bulk yeast transfer
RNA, which in turn was obtained by phenol extraction of approximately 140
kg of commercial baker’s yeast.




 The evidence obtained in preliminary analyses indicated that the alanine
  transfer RNA molecule consisted of a single chain of approximately 80 nu-
  cleotide residues16. Therefore, in principle, structural analysis required the
 identification of the nucleotide residues and the determination of their se-
  quences. Formally, the problem was analogous to determination of the sequence
  of approximately 80 letters in a sentence.
    The experimental approach that was used involved cleavage of the poly-
nucleotide chain into small fragments, identification of the small fragments,
 and then reconstruction of the original nucleotide sequence by determining
 the order in which the small fragments occurred in the RNA molecule. In
 terms of the analogy of a sentence, the approach was equivalent to breaking a
 sentence into words, identifying the words, and reconstructing the sequence
 of the letters in the sentence by determining the order of the words.
    Briefly, the experiments were carried out as follows. Pancreatic ribonu-
clease was used to cleave the RNA chain next to pyrimidine nucleotides, to
give one set of fragments in which each fragment ended in a pyrimidine nu-
cleotide such as cytidylic acid (C-) or uridylic acid (U-). Then, takadiastase
ribonuclease Tl, the enzyme discovered by Sato-Asano and Egami 17, was
used, separately, to cleave the RNA chain specifically at guanylic acid (G-)
residues. This gave a different set of small fragments. The individual small
fragments were isolated by ion-exchange chromatography, followed by
paper electrophoresis or rechromatography, where necessary. Fig. 4 shows


328                      1968 ROBERT W. HOLLEY




Fig. 4. Separation of ribonuclease Tl digest fragments of the alanine transfer RNA by
          chromatography on DEAE-cellulose. (For abbreviations see Table 1)
                                 (From refs. 23 and 31)

 the pattern obtained after chromatography of the ribonuclease Tl digest on a
 diethylaminoethylcellulose column, using Tomlinson and Tener’s proce-
 dures’s with modifications by M. Marquisee and J. Apgar. Under these con-
 ditions, almost all of the different fragments obtained in the digest are separat-
 ed. Each of the separated fragments was hydrolyzed with alkali, and the
 component mononucleotides were identified by chromatographic and elec-
 trophoretic properties and spectra. This was sufficient to determine the se-
 quence of each of the dinucleotides, because the position of attack by each
 ribonuclease was known. Additional information was needed to establish the
 nucleotide sequences of the trinucleotides and larger oligonucleotides.
   New methods of sequence determination were required in the identifica-
tion of several of the larger oligonucleotides. One new method that was es-
pecially useful is outlined in Figs. 5 and 6. As indicated in Fig. 5, partial diges-
tion of an oligonucleotide with snake venom phosphodiesterase gives a mix-
ture of degradation products. A chromatographic pattern obtained from such
a partial digest is shown in Fig. 6. Alkaline hydrolysis of the material recovered
from each peak gives a nucleoside, which arises from the 3’-terminal residue




Fig. 5. Partial digestion of an oligonucleotide with snake venom phosphodiesterase.


                           ALANINE TRANSFER RNA                                       329
 (the right end) of the end) of the oligonucleotide in that peak. Since successive peaks in
 the chromatogram represent the successive stepwise degradation products,
 identification of the nucleosides obtained from the successive peaks gives the
 nucleotide sequence . In the example shown in Figs. 5 and 6, the information
                         19



 obtained is sufficient to establish the nucleotide sequence as A - U - U- C -
 C-G-.




Fig. 6. Chromatographic pattern of partial digest of A - U - U - C - C - G. Recovery
of the oligonucleotide from each peak followed by alkaline hydrolysis gives the nucleo-
                             side indicated (from ref. 32).

Tables 1 and 2 list the identities of the fragments obtained in the pancreatic
ribonuclease and ribonuclease Tl digest, respectively20. Determination of the
structures of all of the fragments required approximately 2.5 years. It was the
work of J.T. Madison and A. Zamir, with assistance in the identification of
the nucleotides from G. Everett. Especially time-consuming were the deter-
mination of the structures of the larger oligonucleotides and the identification
of unusual nucleotides, particularly 1 - methylinosinic acid (Mel-) and 5,6-
dihydrouridylic acid (DiHU-)21. (The latter nucleotide had never been
found in a natural nucleic acid. It does not absorb light at 260       and, as a
consequence, it is invisible in the usual procedures for detecting nucleotides.)
   The presence of distinctive end groups (a free 5’-phosphate group (p) at the
left end of the RNA molecule, as the structure is conventionally written, and
a free 3’- hydroxyl group (OH) at the right end) established that the left end of


330                        1968 ROBERT W.HOLLEY

                                        Table 1
Fragments obtained by complete digestion of alanine RNA with pancreatic ribonudease2




 a
   Abbreviations: p and - are used interchangeably to represent a phosphate residue; A,
 adenosine 3’-phosphate; C, cytidine 3’-phosphate; COH, cytidine (with free 3’-hydroxyl
 group emphasized); DiHU, 5,6-dihydrouridine 3’-phosphate; DiMeG, N2-dimethyl-
 guanosine 3’-phosphate; 1, inosine 3’-phosphate; MeG, 1-methylguanosine 3’-phos-
 phate; MeI, 1-methylinosine 3’-phosphate;           pseudouridine 3’-phosphate; T, ribo-
 thymidine 3’-phosphate; U, uridine 3’-phosphate; U*, a mixture of U, and DiHU; p!,
 2’,3’-cyclic phosphate, for example: Ip!, inosine 2’,3’-cyclic phosphate.
 b
   The presence of a free 3’-hydroxyl group on this fragment indicates that cytidine oc-
 cupies the terminal position in the purified alanine RNA. This establishes that the termi-
 nal adenylic acid residue is missing, as it is from most transfer RNA’s isolated from com-
 mercial baker’s yeast. A terminal adenylic acid residue is replaced under assay conditions
 before the amino acid is attached.



                                       Table 2
      Fragments obtained by complete digestion of alanine RNA with takadiastase
                                 ribonuclease Tl .




     a See Table 1, second footnote.


                            ALANINE TRANSFER RNA                                       331
    the alanine transfer RNA molecule has the structure pG - G - G - C -, and
    the right end the structure U - C - C - A - C - C - AOH .
      The presence of the unusual nucleotides, and also of certain unique se-
    quences, gave a number of overlaps between the two sets of sequences shown in
    Tables 1 and 2. For example, there is only one I- in the molecule, and this is
    found in the sequence C - U - C - C - C - U- U - I - in the ribonuclease
    Tl digest and in the sequence I - G - C - in the pancreatic ribonuclease
    digest. These two sequences must overlap, and the overall sequence must be
    C-U-C-C-C-U-U-I-G-C-.
      All of the information in Tables 1 and 2 is summarized in Table 3, in which
    the sequences are listed in such a way that all the nucleotides in the alanine
    RNA are accounted for in 16 sequences that total 77 nucleotide residues.

                                           Table 3
            Sequences that account for the nucleotide residues in the alanine RNAa




a
 Dotted line separates sequences present in one half of the molecule from those present in
the other half.

                  Cleavage of the RNA into large fragments

    Once the 16 sequences shown in Table 3 were known, with the positions of the
    two end sequences established, the structural problem became one of deter-
    mining the positions of the 14 intermediate sequences. This was done by iso-
    lating a number of large fragments from the RNA. In a crucial experiment it
    was found by J. R. Penswick that very brief treatment of the RNA with ri-
    bonuclease Tl at 0ºC in the presence of magnesium ion splits the molecule at
    one position22. The two halves of the molecule could be separated by chroma-
    tography (Fig. 7). Subsequent digestion of the separated half molecules with
    ribonuclease Tl, followed by chromatographic analysis (Fig. 8), established
    that the sequences listed above the dotted line in Table 3 were present in the
    left half of the molecule and the remaining sequences were present in the right
    half 22.


332                      1968 ROBERT W.HOLLEY




 Fig. 7. Chromatographic separation of two large fragments (I and II) obtained by very
 limited digestion of the alanine transfer RNA with ribonuclease Tl at 0º in the presence
                                of magnesium ion (from ref. 22).

 Using somewhat more vigorous, but still limited treatment of the RNA
 with ribonuclease Tl, we then obtained, with J. Apgar, a number of additional
 large fragments. To determine the structures of the large fragments, each
 large fragment was degraded completely with ribonuclease Tl, the digest was
 chromatographed to give two or more of the ribonuclease Tl peaks already
 identified in Fig.4, and these known sequences were put together, one after


                          ALANINE TRANSFER RNA                                     333




Fig. 9. The nucleotide sequence of the yeast alanine transfer RNA is shown at the top.
Large oligonucleotide fragments isolated and used to reconstruct the complete sequence
                          are indicated below (from ref.25).

 another, until the complete nucleotide sequence of the large fragment was
 known. The sequences that were determined are indicated in Fig. 9 by the
 letters a to k 23,24 .
   The approach used in reconstructing the long sequences can be illustrated
by considering two fragments in detail.
    The chromatographic analysis of a complete ribonuclease Tl digest of frag-
 ment d is shown in Fig. 10. The presence of U - C - C - A - C - COH indi-
 cates that fragment d is from the right end, the 3’-end, of the molecule. There-
 fore, the A - C - U - C - G - sequence must be to the left of this, and the se-
 quence of d is known23.
   The chromatographic analysis of a ribonuclease Tl digest of fragment a is
shown in Fig. 11. The analysis indicates that fragment a is composed of
U - MeG -, 3G -, C - G -, U - G -, and pG -. The presence of pG - estab-
lishes that fragment a is from the left end of the RNA molecule. Since it is




Fig.10. Chromatography of complete ribonuclease Tl digest of fragment d (from ref.23).


334                     1968 ROBERT W.HOLLEY




   Fig.11. Chromatography of complete ribonuclease Tl digest of fragment a
                           (from refs. 23 and 31).


already known (Tables 1 and 3) that the terminal sequence at the left end of
the RNA is pG - G - G - C -, the positions of two of the three G -‘s and
the C - G - are known, and the terminal five nucleotides must be pG - G -
G - C - G -. The positions of the U - G -,U - MeG -, and G - are estab-
lished by the following information. It is known (Table 3) that the U -
MeG - is present in the RNA in the sequence U - MeG - G - C. Since there
is only one C in fragment a, and its position has already been established,
fragment a must terminate before the C of the U - MeG - G - C - sequence.
Therefore, the U- G- must be to the left of the U- MeG-, and the struc-
ture of fragment a can be represented as pG - G - G - C - G - ··· U - G - ··· - U -
MeG -, with one G - remaining to be placed. If the G - is placed to the left
or the right of the U - G - in this structure, there will be G - G - U - se-
quence in the RNA. Since any G - G - U- sequence would appear in a pan-
creatic ribonuclease digest, and such a sequenceis not found (Table 1), the re-
maining G - must be to the right of the MeG - , and the sequence of frag-
ment a is pG - G - G - C - G - U - G - U - MeG - G 2 3 .
   The structural proofs for the other large fragments were carried out in a
                24
similar fashion . Some of these proofs were straightforward; others were
difficult. Eventually, the analyses of the large fragments furnished sufficient
information to establish the sequences of the halves of the RNA molecule
(fragments j and k in Fig. 9). Since the terminal sequences of the RNA were
already known, the halves could be joined in only one way, to give the
I - G - C - sequence which was known to be present in the RNA (Table 1),
and the complete nucleotide sequence of the yeast alanine transfer RNA is
that shown in Fig. 925.


                        ALANINE TRANSFER RNA                                  335

    This is the first nucleotide sequence known for a nucleic acid. Also, it can
be said that the sequence gives, with appropriate modifications for DNA, the
first nucleotide sequence of a gene. This would be the sequence of the gene
that determines the structure of the alanine transfer RNA in yeast cells.
   It was, of course, tremendously satisfying to be able to solve each experi-
mental problem as it arose, and eventually be able to complete the nucleotide
sequence. The satisfaction was increased by the fact that we were able to work
with the alanine transfer RNA from discovery to isolation to structural anal-
ysis. In these times of highly competitive research, few scientists have the
satisfaction of carrying through a research problem that takes 9 years. With-
out minimizing the pleasure of receiving awards and prizes, I think it is true
that the greatest satisfaction for a scientist comes from carrying a major piece
of research to a successful conclusion.



                           Three-dimensional structure

When a problem is solved, one’s attention turns to other problems. With the
complete nucleotide sequence of the alanine transfer RNA established, we
became concerned with other questions about the alanine RNA structure.
One question of particular interest has to do with the interaction of the transfer
RNA with a messenger RNA. Speculation suggests that the three-dimen-
sional structure of a transfer RNA, in the presence of the magnesium ion
under conditions suitable for protein synthesis, should have the coding triplet
of nucleotides, the anticodon, exposed in a way that will permit it to interact
with a triplet of nucleotides, the codon, in the messenger RNA26. The se-
quence that constitutes the anticodon in the alanine transfer RNA is the se-
quence I - G - C, present in the middle of the molecule and including the
linkage that is so sensitive to attack by ribonuclease Tl. One arrangement of
the RNA chain, suggested by E. B. Keller and by Penswick, has the I - G - C -
sequence in an exposed position and also has very interesting symmetry. This
                                               25
"cloverleaf" arrangement is shown in Fig. 12 . In drawing this arrangement,
it was assumed that there would be Watson-Crick-type pairing of A to U
and G to C in the double-stranded regions and the unpaired regions would
form loops as suggested by Fresco, Alberts and Doty 27. The strongest evi-
dence for the "cloverleaf" arrangement of the secondary structure of transfer
RNA’s comes from the finding that all of the transfer RNA sequences that
have been determined since 1965 fit the same type of base-pairing arrange-


336                    1968 ROBERT W.HOLLEY




 Fig.12. Suggested secondary structure of the alanine transfer RNA (from ref.25).



 ment. There are now 12 of these sequences and they have come from struc-
 tural studies in many different laboratories28. In all instances the anticodon
 sequence is found at the same position in the middle loop. The "cloverleaf"
 arrangement can be only a partial description of the three- dimensional struc-
 tural. This is clear from chemical and enzymatic studies, which indicate that
 the molecule is folded in some way 2 9. However, details of the folding are not
 clear. Some further information can no doubt be obtained by chemical and
 enzymatic probing, but it seems likely that proof of the three-dimensional
 structure of a transfer RNA will wait for X-ray analysis30.
    That then is our story of the alanine transfer RNA. It all followed quite nat-
 urally from taking a sabattical leave. I strongly recommend sabbatical leaves.



                                   Acknowledgment

 Our work was made possible by financial assistance from the National
 Science Foundation. Fellowships and grant support from the National In-
 stitutes of Health are also gratefully acknowledged. Special thanks are due
 Dr. W. H. Allaway, Director of the U. S. Plant, Soil and Nutrition Labora-
 tory, for his confidence and encouragement throughout the sequence deter-
 mination.


                        ALANINE TRANSFER RNA                                  337
  1. M.B. Hoagland, Biochim. Biopkys. Acta, 16 (1955) 288; M.B. Hoagland, E.B. Keller
      and P.C. Zamecnik, J. Biol. Chem., 218 (1956) 345.
 2. J.A. DeMoss, S.M. Genuth and G.D. Novelli, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci ( U.S.), 42 (1956)
      325.
 3. P. Berg and G. Newton, Federation Proc., 15 (1956) 219.
 4. R.W. Holley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 79 (1957) 658.
  5. R.W. Holley and J. Goldstein, J. Biol. Chem., 234 (1959) 1765.
 6. M.B. Hoagland, P.C. Zamecnik and M.L. Stephenson, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 24
      (1957) 215; M.B. Hoagland, M.L. Stephenson, J.F. Scott, L.I. Hecht and P.C.
      Zamecnik, J. Biol. Chem., 231 (1958) 241.
   7. K. Ogata and H. Nohara, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 25 (1957) 659.
   8. E.A. Allen, E. Glassman and R. Schweet, J. Biol. Chem., 235 (1960) 1068.
  9. H.G. Zachau, G. Acs and F. Lipmann, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (U.S.), 44 (1958) 885.
 10. L.I. Hecht, M.L. Stephenson and P.C. Zamecnik, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (U.S.), 45
       (1959) 505.
 11. P. Berg and E.J. Ofengand, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (U.S.), 44 (1958) 78; R.S. Schweet,
       F.P. Bovard, E. Allen and E. Glassman, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (U.S.), 44 (1958) 173.
 12. L.C. Craig and D. Craig, in A. Weissberger (Ed.), Technique of Organic Chemistry,
       Vol. 3, Part 1, 2nd Edn, Interscience, New York, 1956, p.149.
 13. B.P. Doctor, J. Apgar and R.W. Holley, J. Biol. Chem., 236 (1961) 1117.
 14. J. Apgar, R.W. Halley and S.H. Merrih, J. Biol. Chem., 237 (1962) 796.
 15. R. Monier, M.L. Stephenson and P.C. Zamecnik, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 43 (1960)
       1 ; R.W. Halley, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 10 (1963) 186.
 16. R.W. Holley, J. Apgar, S.H. Merrill and P.L. Zubkoff, J. Am. Chem. Soc, 83 (1961)
       4861.
17. K. Sato-Asano and F. Egami, Nature, 185 (1960) 462.
18. R.V. Tomlinson and G.M. Tener, J. Am. Chem. Soc, 84 (1962) 2644; Biochemistry, 2
      (1963) 697.
19. R.W. Halley, J.T. Madison and A. Zamir, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 17 (1964)
      389.
20. R.W. Holley, G.A. Everett, J.T. Madison and A. Zamir, J. Biol. Chem., 240 (1965)
      2122.
 21. J.T. Madison and R.W. Holley, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 18 (1965) 153.
 22. J.R. Penswick and R.W. Halley, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. ( U.S.), 53 (1965) 543.
23. J. Apgar, G.A.Everett and R.W. Holley, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (U.S.), 53 (1965) 546.
24. J. Apgar, G.A. Everett and R.W. Holley, J. Biol. Chem., 241(1966) 1206.
 25. R.W. Holley, J. Apgar, G.A. Everett, J.T. Madison, M. Marquisee, S.H. Merrill,
       J. R. Penswick and A. Zamir, Science, 147 (1965) 1462.
26. M.R. Bernfield and M.W. Nirenberg, Science, 147 (1965) 479.
27. J.R. Fresco, B.M. Alberts and P. Doty, Nature, 188 (1960) 98.
28. H.G. Zachau, D.Dütting and H.Feldman, Z.Physiol.Chem., 347 (1966) 212; J.T.
       Madison, G. A. Everett and H. Kung, Science, 153 (1966) 531; U.L. RajBhandary,
       S.H. Chang, A. Stuart, R.D. Faulkner, R.M. Hoskinson and H.G. Khorana, Proc.
       Natl. Acad. Sci. (U.S.), 57 (1967) 751; A.A. Baev, T.V. Vekstern, A.D. Mirzabekov,
       A.I. Krutilina, L. Li and V.D. Axelrod, Mol. Biol., 1 (1967) 754; H.M. Goodman,


338                    1968 ROBERT `W.HOLLEY

     J. Abelson, A. Landy, S. Brenner and J.D. Smith, Nature, 217 (1968) 1019; S.K.
     Dube, K.A. Marcker, B.F.C. Clark and S. Cory, Nature, 218 (1968) 232; S. Take-
     mura, T. Miqutani and M. Miyazaki, Biockem. J., 63 (1968) 277; M. Staehelin, H.
     Rogg, B.C. Baguley, T. Ginsberg and W. Wehrli, Nature, 219 (1968) 1363.
29. J.A. Nelson, S.C. Ristow and R.W. Holley, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 149 (1967) 590.
30. B.F.C. Clark, B.P. Doctor, K.C. Holmes, A. Kug, K.A. Marcker, S.J. Morris and
     H.H. Paradies, Nature, 219 (1968) 1222.
31. R.W. Holley, J. Am. Med. Ass., 194 (1965) 868.
32. R.W. Holley, Progr. Nucl. Acid. Res. Mol. Biol., 8 (1968) 37.
