41

CELLULAR  IMMUNE RECOGNITION  AND THE BIOLOGICAL  ROLE OF MAJOR TRANS— PLANTATION  ANTIGENS

Nobel  Lecture, December 8, 1996
by

RoLr  M.  ZINKERNACiEL

Institute of Experimental  Immunology,  University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


THE ORIGINAL EXPERIMENT ON T-CELL SPECIFICITY
While  Immunology  began  as an  attempt  to understand  immunity  against in- fectious disease,  
in  the 1960s and  early 1970s it was largely preoccupied  with antibody and T-cell responses 
against easily available foreign protein antigens or  chemically  defined  small  molecules  
(haptens) ¹. The  mechanisms  of  for- eign-organ  graft rejection were also intensively studied, 
although  the biologic- al function of the  highly polymorphic  major transplantation molecules 
coded by  the   major  histocompatibility  complex   (MHC,  HLA  in  humans,  H-2  in mice)      
was largely  unclear.  Only a few  people  studied  immunity  against  in- fectious agents. The  
Department  of Microbiology  at  the  Australian  National University  in  The  John  Curtin  
School  of  Medical  Research   in  Canberra, headed by G. Ada, was one  place where virologists 
and  immunologists worked together on antibacterial  and antiviral T-cell-mediated immunity,  
particularly on  the capacity of immunized cytotoxic CD8* T-cells to destroy either virus in- 
fected or allogeneic  target cells in ri/ro. Peter C. Doherty from Brisbane, who had  returned  to 
Australia from Edinburgh  at the end of 1971, was working in this  Department.  He  was  interested 
 in  inflatnmator y  cell  responses  in  the brain  against  virus  infections.  When  I  arrived  
in  Canberra  in  early  1973  I started working on  Listeria with R. V. Blanden, and joined forces 
with Peter  to work  on  cell-mediated  immunity  to  the  lymphocytic  choriomeningitis virus 
(LCMV)    ".  I  had   come  from  an  institution  that was involved  in  establishing the   ’'Cr  
 release   assays   by  T.   Brunner   and  J.   C.  Cerottini   in   Lausan ne, Switzerland⁷ ',  
and  I  therefore  attempted  to  establish  the  cytc›toxicity  assay against  LLMV in  the  same 
way as  R. V. Blanden  and  I. Gardner were  using  it to  m‹initor  cellular  immune  responses  
against ectrtnnelia  virus  (mouse  p‹ x) in  mice".  Because  many  papers  on  cytotoxic  T-cell  
responses  against  I.€  MV had   already  been  published  by  various  groups'" I '  and     
since  studies  had  al- really  been  carried  out on  mouse  pox in  € anberra  by R. V. 
Blanrlen’s grtiiip, members  of  the  Department  were  sceptical  that  we  should  and  ccruld  
run with  the  strong competition. Although we had  some initial  problems because of  our   
limited experience with LCMV we successfully established  the  test with some  help from  I.  D. 
Gardner.  We  then  used  this  test  to find out  whether  in-

42                                        Physiolo     or Medicine  1996

flammatory  cells  in  the  cerebrospinal  fluid  of  mice  infected  intracerebrally with  LCMV  
were  cytolytic  to  oi/ro and   whether  there  was  a  correlation  be- tween  cytotoxic T-cell 
activity and  severity of choriomeningitis. P. C. Doherty was very good  at collecting  a few 
microliters  of cerebrospinal  fluid  from  the cistern a magna of a mouse. I miniaturized  the 
"‘Cr release assay  to be able  to measure  the activity of such small numbers of cells in 
microwell  plates. These experiments  revealed  that  cytotoxic  T-cells  specifically  destroying  
LCMV  in- fected  target cells could be found in the cerebral spinal fluid of normal mice, but  not 
 in  that of nude mice lacking a thymus and  T-cells;  this implied  that T- cells probably also 
destroyed  infected  meningeal and ependymal  cells  tn vivo and   that  this was  the  essential  
pathogenic  mechanism  causing  lethal chorio- meningitis.   These  findings  were   published   in 
  the   journal  of  Experimental Medicine  in March 1973¹². In  this journal  a paper by Oldstone, 
McDevitt and collaborators  had just appeared, showing  that  mice with  different  major  his- 
tocompatibility gene complexes differed with  respect to their susceptibility to LCM disease after 
intracerebral infection ¹". We  therefore  checked whether a correlation   existed   between   the  
 virus  specific   cytotoxic  T-cell   activity   in mice and  their susceptibility to disease. Six 
 to eight mice of each  inbred and cross-bred  strain  available  at  the  school  were  infected  
intracerebrally  with LCMV.  Two  of  each  were  sacrificed  on  day  7 after  infection,  when  
the  first mice  became sick,  to test antiviral  cytotoxic T-cell activities in spleens  (Table 
1). The  remaining  mice were  monitored  for  the  development  of  lethal  dis- ease during the 
next ten days. While all the  mice died of choriomeningitis by day  10,  surprisingly  only  some  
strains  of  mice  generated  virus-specific  cyto- toxic T-cell activity that was measurable in 
our  in ri/ro assay  (Table 1) . This re- sult either  signalled  that cytotoxic  T-cells  had  
nothing  to do with  lethal  cho- riomeningitis, or, alternatively, that our  test was in  some way 
inadequate. The latter interpretation proved  to be correct: We had  used  mouse L-929 cells in- 
fected with LCMV as target cells to assess cytotoxic T-cell activities. This was a fibroblast  cell 
 line  used  by virologists  at  the John  Curtin  School  of  Medical Research  to  quantitate  
viruses  by  a  plaque  assay”.  Since  this  was  the   only mouse-cell line usually used in the  
Department, along with a Vero-cell line de- rived from  monkeys  or  the  BHK-cell  line derived 
from  hamsters,  we chose  it to  provide  target cells in  the  virus-specific cytotoxic T-cell  
assays.  By chance, and fortunately,  the mice  that were most commonly  used  in  the  Department 
were  of  the  CBA  strain,  while  the  L-cells  had   been  derived  from  a  closely related  
mouse  strain  ti3H  some  50  years  earlier.  Also  by  chance,  both  mice possessed  the  same  
MHC-molecules   (H-2‘) .  Our    critical  test  now  revealed that LCMV-immune  spleen  cells from 
all mice  that possessed  the  H-2‘ hap1o- type  (as do  e.g. CBA mice) , including cross-breeds 
with H-2‘ mice, lysed L929 (H-2ᵏ) cells infected with  the virus, but did  not lyse uninfected  
targets, or tho- se infected  with  a  third-party  virus;  all  spleen  cells derived  from  
immunized mice  that were not  of the  H-2‘ type failed  to do  so'".
Two additional  experiments carried out within  the  next few weeks prompt- ly  confirmed  these  
findings.  It  was  important  to  show  that  L€iMV-immune lymphocytes  from  non-H-2ᵏ strains of  
mice  were  able  to lyse  LCMV-infected

Rolf  M.  Zinkernagel                                               43
Table  1.  Experiments  demonstrating  MHC-restriction specificity  and  positive  selection  in 
the  thymus  for antiviral  cytotoxic T-cells.

Stem cells       Thymus           Other host        Virus-specific CD8“ (MHZ.,  H—2)    (MHC, H-2)  
 cells (MHC,       T-cells specific for
H-2)                    (MHC, H-2)
Lethal  t/DS’-T-cel1- mediated  chorio- meningitis at ter
i.c. infection

I      £lrigznal experimr.rite  with normal mir.e                 k
1.   k                       k                       k                          +
2.   b                       b                       b
d
100 %
100 7n

3.   d                       d                       d                          —                   
 +
4.   k/d                   k/d                    k/d                      •
II    1“hymu.s  tr‹snsplantation   to thymus-deficient recipient  mice:
1.   k/d                  —                      k/d
2.   k/d                  k                       k/d                                             1
3.   k/d                  d                       k/d                                           +
4.   d                       k                       d                                              
 +
100 %
100 %

0  TO
100      0
100   0
100 9r

Normal  mice  (I)  vs.  mice lacking  a thymus  that therefore  have  no T-cells and were given  a 
thymus  Draft  under  the  kidney capsule  (II) , were  infected with  Lf/MV  intracerebrally. All 
mice died, except those that had no T-cells  (II.I .) , because of the lethal CD8* T-cell-media- 
ted LCMV-specific  immunopathology. The fact that mice without functional T-cells survived shows  
that  the noncytopathic  LCMV does not cause disease directly.
The 1.CMMV-specific cytotoxic T-cells lysed infected target cells that share MHC-m‹ilecules (e.g.  
1. 1.;  Immune  T-cells  from  infected  CBA  mice)  (H-2')  lysed  infected  L92S  fibrtiblast 
cells (H-2‘) '’.
The MHZ. of the thymus determines which MHC is recognised by mature T-cells. The ex- perimental  
group II.3. shows  that  (H-2‘ x H-2')  mice with a thymus  H-?‘ generated virus- specific T-cells 
that lysed virus infected H-2d  target cells but not infected H-2k cells’^. There are,   however,   
experimental   exceptions   to   this   rule   (II.4.) .   Thymus-deficient   nude mice  (H-2")  
reconstituted  with an H-2k thymus generated H-2’-restricted T-cells"

target cells of the corresponding  MHZ.-type. This did not prove to be easy, be- cause  the  other  
available  mouse-cell  lines  in  the  Department,  such  as  the H-2" mastocytoma P8l5 or the H-2' 
thymoma EL4, could not  be infected  with LCMV.  Because  of  my  work  with  R.  Blanden  on  
firths—which  infects  ma- crophages  and  is  essentially  controlled   by  cell-mediated   
activation   of  ma- crophages as shown by Mackanessˡ"—we tried to use macrophages directly iso- 
lated   from   peritoneal   washings   of   mice   as   target   cells   for   these   tests. 
Macrophages  adhered  well  to  plastic,  and  could  be  readily  infected  and  la- belled  with  
 ’Cr.  Proper  criss-cross  experiments  showed  that LCMV-immune T-cells  from  H-2'  mice  lyse  
LCMV-infected  macrophages  of  H-2' origin  but not  those of other H-2 types, and  vice versa. 
The  report on these findings was sent off  via J.  Humphrey  as a  letter  to  Nature in  early  
December'’;  it was ac- cepted in January 1974, and  was published in April 1974. The  first public 
pre- sentation  of our  data outside Australia was at a Keystone  meeting,  in Squaw Valley, 
attended  by A. Cunningham  in February and a Brook Lodge  meeting attended  by  G.  Ada  in  March 
 1974.  A  letter  sent  back  to  Canberra  by  A. Cunningham  summarized data from G. Shearer 
showing that TNP-specific  cy- totoxic T-cells lysed syngeneic TNP-lated  targets more efficiently  
than alloge- neic TNP-lated  targets;  these  data were  submitted  to  the  European  journal  of

44                                             Physiology or Medicine  1996

/mmuaofogy’7 at  about the time our  report appeared  in  Nature. Obviously,  the two findings had 
emerged  independently.

INTERPRETATIONS OF THE DATA
The    biological  function  of  MHC and  of  transplantation antigens was largely unknown  in  the 
 early 1970s. Their function  was obviously  not  simply  to fru- strate transplantation surgeons. 
Transplantation  antigens have  been  defined by P. A. Gorer’’,  and  by G. Snellˡ  , based  on  
the work  of  C.  Little,  L. Strong and  others,  who  had  developed  many  inbred  strains of  
mice  in  order  to  be able  to  define  the  rules  of  transplantation  and  rejection  of  
tissue  and   cell grafts  (reviewed  by J.   Klein’) .  Haematologists,  particularly  j.  
Dausset"  and
J. van  Rood“0, defined lymphocyte  surface antigens in  humans as being simi-
lar  to  red  blood  cell antigens,  and  called  them  human  lymphocyte  antigens (HLA) .  Once  
many  patients  had  been  typed  for  their  transplantation  anti- gens  it  became  apparent  
that  several  disease  susceptibilities were  somehow linked  to  the  transplantation  antigen  
types.  It  was  revealed  in  studies  by  B. Benacerraf‘’,  and  later  in  great  and  critical  
detail  by  H.   McDevitt  and   co- workers"" "’ and  by F. Li1ly*⁴, that inbred strains of guinea 
 pigs and  mice  dif- fered  in  their  responses  to  some  of  the  model  antigens  or  tumor  
studied. Because  of  the  availability  of  well-defined  inbred  strains  of  mice,  this  was 
readily mapped  to the  MHC and  even  to subregions of  the  MHC in  mice  lay
H.   McDevitt  et  al."'°.  In  the  early 1970s,  transplantation antigens were widely discussed  
because  of these findings.  MHC polymorphism  was thought either to prevent mutual parasitism or  
transmission  of tumor cells²‘, or  to prevent vi- ruses  or   other   pathogens  from  mimicking   
transplantation  antigens  and, therefore, from eliminating the species"’ "’; alternatively, it was 
proposed  that transplantation antigens functioned  as enzymes or  as generators  of’ antibody 
diversity"'.   A   most   fascinating   proposal   had   been   formulated   by   H.S. Lawrence  in 
 1959"'.  He  proposed   that  infectious  agents  complexed  with transplantation antigens and 
formed  a  (srlf + x)  complex—a  fantastically  pro- phetic view of what was to  be  found later!
There is no  doubt that  the experiments,  which were  to reveal  the  essential role  of  MHC  and 
 T-cell  recognition  in  all,  depended  upon  the foundation built by tumor and  transplantation 
immunologists. Without inbred and MHC (H-2) —congenic or  H-2 mutant mouse strains, as developed  
by €i. Snell'" and C?.  Bailey"-  and   coworkers,  respectively,  this  problem  would  not  at  
the  time have been  accessible  to analysis. There is also no  doubt  that MHC-restricted, T-cell 
recognition  would  have been discovered  by c›thers,  using a diff‘erent ap- proach, a few years 
later. This would certainly have happened once cloned ef- f‘ector T-cells were developed  by M. 
Schreier, H. Hengartner, H. von Boehmer and  G.  Fathman” ’4, when  T-cell  hybridomas  were  
developed  by J.  Kappler and  R. Marrack, or when T-cell receptors were first successfully 
analyzed  byJ. Kappler,  P. Marrack and J. Allison"’ ’* and  then were  molecularly  defined  by
M. Davis and  T. Mak" ”.
From our  very first experiments showing the double specificity of cytotoxic

Rolf  M.  Zinkernagel                                               45

T-cells  for  MHC  and  virus,  we  immediately  knew  that  we  had  discovered something  
important.  Our  results were  not  the  only ones  that hinted  at the biological  role of  major  
transplantation antigens,  and  they fitted  several  ob- servations  made  during  1972/73.  In  
addition  to  the  suggestions  from  cyto- toxic   T-cell   studies   with   leukemia,   
ectromelia   and   UM    viruses’ ⁴'  ⁴1 4'  , there were  the experiments by B. Kindred and  D. 
Shreffler⁴’, who had  repor- ted   that   H-2-incompatible   T-helper   cells   transfused    to   
T-cell-deficient nude   mice   were   not   able   to   help   nude   B  cells   make   antibodies. 
  Also,
P. j.  McCullagh  and  D.  H.  Katz,  H.  Hamaoka  and  B.  Benacerraf  had  shown that 
histoincompatible B cells and  T-cells were not  interacting successfully  to produce  a good  IgM  
to IgG switch⁴³,⁴⁴. In  parallel  experiments  with  inbred strains  of  guinea  pigs,  A.  S.  
Rosenthal  and  E.  M.  Shevach  analyzed  antigen- specific  proliferative  T-cell  responses,  
and  found  them  only when  printed  T- cells and  antigen-presenting cells were from guinea pigs 
with  the  same MHC type⁴". Most of these experiments were, however, complicated  and  difficult  
to interpret, because the  mixing of T-cells and  B-cells or  antigen-presenting cells of  
different  MHC  type  initiated  allogeneic  mixed  lymphocyte  reactions,  re- sulting  in  
non-specific  signals.  These  findings  were,  therefore,  only  accept- ed  with  hesitation  by 
immunologists; this changed when  our  data appeared. The  simplicity  of  the  iu  vitro assays,  
the   parallel  observation  by  C•.  Shearer using TNP’’, its easy reproducibility by R. V. 
Blanden  and  I. D. Gardner using ectroinelia virus46, by U. Koszinowski  using vaccinia virus⁴’, 
by E. Simpson, S. Gordon   and   H.   von   Boehmer   using   the   male   H-Y-antigen⁴'  ⁴’   and  
  by
M.J.  Bevan  using  various  minor  histocompatibility antigens"",  all  helped  to convince  
immunologists  of  the  general  character  of  MHZ?-restricted  T-cell recognition.  Also  
MHC-restriction of T-cell  recognition  was soon  confirmed in  otro  to  be  also  important  for  
antiviral  protection  transmissible  from  im- mune  ter  naive  recipients  by  immune  T-cells.  
By  1977,  A.  McMichael  and coworkers  in  I.  Askonas's  lab  showed  that  human  influenza  
virus-specific cytotoxic  T-cells"1   and   E.  Goulmy   proved   that  male  antigen   
H-Y-specific cytotoxic T-cells were HLA-restricted’".
Our  results  triggered  heated  discussions  in  the  Department.  We  thought that the virus 
somehow altered the normal cells’ MHC molecules and  that this virus-specific alteration  was 
recognized  by cytotoxic T-cells in  a similar way to that of foreign  transplantation antigens. 
Everyone's imagination  and  intellect was stimulated  to come up with a more general, simpler and  
more convincing explanation for the findings. Discussions were particularly lively because at the 
same  time  K.  Lafferty  and  A. Cunningham  developed  their  ideas  on  second signals  
necessary  to  induce  responses  against  foreign   transplantation  anti- gens"’, G. Ada and  R. 
V. Blanden where studying other virus-specific T-cell  re- sponses,  L. Pilarski,  P. Bretscher 
were thinking about B-cell responses and  sig- nal   requirements   along   the   two-signal   
theories   of   P.   Bretscher   and   M. Cohn"'""  and  C.  Parish,  I.  D.  Gardner,  I.  
Ramshaw,  A.  Happle,  S.  Kirov,  W. Davidson,  M. Dunlop and Y Rosenberg, working on &cell and 
T-cell response in various virus infections, were discussing  the  role of enzymes modifying  car- 
bohydrates or other self-surface  structures  to explain  the experiments.

46                                        Physiology  or  Medicine  1996

FURTHER ANALYSIS
We interpreted  our findings to signify that virus infection somehow caused al- terations  of  
transplantation  antigens  on  the  cell  surtace  by  forming  a  com- plex of  viral antigen with 
MHC-molecules, or undefined structural alterations or complexing of the  two, and  that these 
alterations were recognized  by T-cell receptors   (Fig.   l ) ’".  Foreign   transplantation  
antigens   (so-called   alloanti- gens)  could  then  be viewed  as a genetically  altered  form  
of self-transplanta- tion  antigens.  This view differed  from  the  then-favcrtired  possibility  
that lym- phocytes and  targe t cells interacted  mutually via transplantation antigens  (see 
Figure) , i.e. H-2ᵏ interacted  best with  H-2ᵏ, H-2" best with  H-2‘ molecules  in a  symmetrical  
like-like  complementarity.  This  intimacy  model  was  soon  ex- cluded  by  the   
“Ft-experiment”  showing  that  virus-specific  cytotoxic  T  lym- phocytes  from  heteroZygote  
(H-2ᵏ  x  H-2ᵇ)  Ft  mice  consisted  of  at  least  two










Akered Self














Modified  H-2                                        Virus + H-z
Fig.  1 .  ñJr›r/a/i  oi html/y /iro{r›.vr‹/ fr› cxJ›fni ri  h   H€.-rr.stn r /rr7  I-i'ell reroyi 
it,lan. The   i‹1ca  that  M Hf’.-ni‹ilc‹-u lps i ii te i .ict- ed  in u tual ly  t‹i [ic•r in it  
T-t.eh  and  target  cell  to ‹ ‹›ine  clrise  en on gli  topt ther  (.'\)  Eva.s  dispr‹iv‹ n  lay 
 the  rle na ‹›n- str ation  th tit  i ii  a n  F 1  b‹ twce n  H-2‘ and  H-2'  (H-2‘  X  H-2")  
mice  there  w‹-rc  twti  clo n ally  spe‹ ifi‹  T-ccl 1s  th at we re sJiecifi‹  f ‹›r i irus plus 
Al-2   a n d a  sec‹i n d p‹›pulatiun  th at was sp‹ i‘ific tin  I I-2' . ’Flit rt-liir‹  T-cell  
rece Nutr me wi•r‹   eit h cr   specific  to r  th t   vii ally  rn‹4dified  M HC  inril‹-‹ iilc  
where  ne i t lie r  dt• t ails  of  ei thei   vi i iis  an tig‹ i i  ‹›i MH I   rn‹›le‹ ules were  
reco5ri iz‹•d  in  its original  for ni  (B)  ‹›r T-ce lls were specific  mri  a ct›inplex  to 
rrnt•d  l›‹ tween MHZ . in‹›lec me and vii al an tigcn ,  that the  I-cell  rece ptor rr-cogn ized  
parts ‹›f  the vii al an tigt•n  ai i‹1 p:u ts tif' the MHf   iii‹ilcculc.  I I is  n ow cleai  in  
I 9HG"'  "'   iliat th e T-‹ ‹•ll  receptor  is cont pris‹ d ‹if  tivri  c hai ii s \'u :u ml \'|3  
th tit  i ‹-i t›g n ize  a  viral  peptide-  prcsci i ten{  l9)'  the  M Hi    nitsIce ule"’.  \V 
hat  is  lt ss  un clear  ((i) ,  ivlie th ei  th e  T-re 11  re- cept‹› r,  he re drawi i as a sq 
uare ,  in te rac ts wi th  the peptide  plus MHti ct›mplex  is alwavs iii  the same  d i recity d 
fa- shion , s‹i  that ‹ t•rtai n  hypervariable  regi‹›iis i›t' th e  rece ptor alyays mtei act 
with  corrt sp‹›ntling  par ts oI  the pe p-
tide ,  or  rel  th t   two  M I .It   doin ai us  fri rm i ng  the  groove  ( na ore  Ii kelv) ,  
or  ivlj e th er   al t‹-rnatively  t[ie  red e JH‹›r
i i ite racts wiih  th t- i ‹nnplex l'or med  b\' MHZ. pl us peptide  in  many p‹issible  ran dtim  
u'ays.  rein ‹4d iiceci  wi th  p‹ r- in issit›n ‹if  Nant re,  2.5 I,   ñ47,  IS 74, (\‹›pyrigh t  
( 1974)  Macm illari  Magazines  I.td.  in ml  JAMA,  2.74,  1.070,  1 HU ñ.

Rolf  M.   Zinkernagel                                                  47

subpopulations, one  of each  being  specific  for infected  H-2‘,  and  the  other for  infected  
H-2" targets. Since both MHC types were co-dominantly  express- ed  on  the  lymphocyte surfaces on 
all host cells, this indicated  that some T-cell receptors of one  T-cell subpopulation  were  
probably specific for  H-2ᵏ-plus-vi- rue and  the  other subpopulation  was specific for  
H-2'-plus-virus.
Further experiments  together with R. Blanden  carried out with the  help of mouse geneticists  
(including C. David and  H.  McDevitt in  the  U.S.A.)  showed that  the  H-2D  and  H-2K  regions  
coding  for class I  MHC  molecules  were  in-
volved  in  virus-specific cytotoxic  T-cell  recognition‘6. These findings separat-
ed the MHC-restricted recognition  by virus-specific cytotoxic T-cells from  the MHC   class   II   
-(H-21) -linked   immune   response   phenomena    regulating T-cell—B-cell, or  T-cell—macrophage  
interactions.  Analyses  of  cytotoxic  T-cell interactions  tu vivo causing lethal 
immunopathology⁵⁷, antiviral protection“’, and  protection  against  Stella  monoytogeiie  ”,   all 
 confirmed   that  MHC  re- striction  was also valid  iu rtvo.
In  our  second  letter  to  Nature, we  therefore  concluded  that  T-cells  might function  
essentially  by  surveying  the   integrity  of  transplantation  antigens. Recognition  of cell 
surface  alteration  due  to virus infection,  chemical  modi- fication  or  genetic  differences  
(i.e. alloantigens)  may  then  be  accomodated within  the  same  model.  A  general  hypothesis  
was  formulated  in  Lanret  in 197a", which  stated explicitly  that  the function  of the  major 
histocompatibi- lity molecules  is to signal modifications  of self-MHC  to the  immune system.
What we  had  discovered  and  tried  to explain  for  cytotoxic T-cells,  we  also extended  to  
helper  T-cells,  proposing  that  they  might  recognize  antigen-in- duced  modifications  of Ia  
(as the  MHC class II  molecules  were  called  at  the time)  on  macrophages and  B cells. 
Importantly,  the  results ofl“ered  an  expla- nation  of  the  reasons for  the  extensive  
polymorphism  of  MHC  molecules;  it minimized  both  the  possibility  that some cell-destroying  
pathogens failed  to cause  immunogenic  modification  and  the  risk of  there  being  general  
unre- spc›n.siveness in  a  population.  Obviously,  what  was  unknown  at  the  time  was that  
MHC molecules  or  transplantation  antigens  are  the  antigen-presenting molecules  that are  
recognized  as a complex with  the  antigenic  peptide. This became  known  in  the  subsequent  
ten  years,  mostly  thanks  to  the  work  of  E. Unanue"'  and  H.  Grey  and   coworkers"²  for  
class  II  antigens,  as well  as  on the particularly revealing and  eye-opening work of A. 
Townsend". He showed that  class  I  molecules  of  virus-infected  cells  present  peptides,  9—10 
 amino acids in length, to virus-specific cytotoxic T-cells. Similar results were obtained bye. 
MaFyanski  and  coworkers"⁴. These peptides became very real when  they were  first  eluted  from   
target  cells  by  the   group  of  H.  G.  Rammensee"". Peptides were also soon shown  to be 
involved in anti-tumor CTL responses by
T. Boon’s group6’. All  became convincingly clear in  the classical studies of P.
Bjorkinan, J. Strominger and D. Wiley in 1987, when  the  X-ray cristallography of a class I 
HLA-molecule  revealed  the  peptide  binding cleft"  ".   It is proba- bly not  only by chance 
that within a few weeks of the  news of  this year's Nobel Prize  for  specificity  of  the  
cell-mediated  immune  response,  the  first  studies appeared  in SCteurr and   Nature, revealing 
the  X-ray structure  of the  complete

48                                        Ph  siolo     or  Medicine  1996

complex  of  the  T-cell  receptor-MHC  class I  plus  the  bound  peptide  by  I. A. Wilson  and  
by D. Wiley and   their coworkers⁶" ⁷⁰. What is less unclear, in 1fi90 is,  which  part  of  the  
TCR,  and  whether  always  corresponding  parts  of   the TCR, recognized  the peptide and the 
MHCi molecule in the same general po- sition’' ⁷" (Fig. 1) .

I MPLIGATIONS
"1“he  role of thr thymus in MHC-restricted  T-rell r  pertoir« selection: Experiments  first 
published   by  M.  Bevan  at  MIT”  and  conducted  in  parallel  in   my  lab   at Scripps with  
the  help ofJ. €?allahan,  G. Dennert and J. Klein  signalled  a role of   thyinic   MHC  in  
selection   of   the    MHC-restricted   T-cell   specificity” ’". Reconstitution  of  lethally  
radiated  H-2'  recipient  mice  with  bone-marrow
stem  cells of  (H-2ᵏ x H-2')  FI  origin  resulted  in  bone  marrow  chimeras  that were  
tolerant  of  H-2ᵏ  and   H-2‘;  when  immunised,  these  chimeras  reacted
against  H-2" plus  minor  histocompatibility antigens,  or,  in  our  experiments, against  H-2'  
plus  virus  only  (Table  I ) .  This  indicated  that  MHC -restricted T-cells  were  
specifically  selected  during  T-cell  maturation  according  to  the MHZ? expressed  in  the  
thymus. This was formally shown  when  MHC.-restrict- ed  T-cell  specificity  was studied  in  
mice  that  lacked  a  thymus  and  therefore did  not  have  mature T-cells. When  these  mice of  
(H-2L  x  H-2')  F   type  were given a thymus of fetal H-2ᵏ origin, they eventually generated  
effector T-cells that   recognized   virus-infected   H-2‘,   but   not   infected   H-2"   target  
 cells. Si+rprisingly,  thymus  deficient  nude  mice  given  a  histoincompatible  thymes 
generated  T-cells  that were specific for  the  nude mice’s  MHC"',  but  in  gene- ral  the  MHC  
(apparently  of  the  radio-resistant  part  of  the  thymes)  selec ted the  restriction  
specificity of virus-specific cytotoxic T-cells.
These  thymus  and  bone-marrow-grafting experiments  had  an  immediate impact on clinical 
medicine  by providing rational rules for the reconstitiition cif  immtinocleficiency disease. 
Accordingly,  it is not  only necessary  t‹  deplete T-cells  in  order  to avoid  lethal  
Draft-versus-host disease  but,  in  addition,  the host and  the transplanted  bone marrow cells 
and  the  host's own or  the  trans- planted  thymus grafts must share MHC molecules. Otherwise, 
T-cells capable c›Y recognizing  antigen-plus-MHC  molecules  on  infected  epithelial,  mesen- 
chymal  cells,  macrophages  or  the  corresponding  B cells would  not  develop and  function  
appropriately  in such  reconstituted  hosts. These  rules for  posi- tive  selection  of  T-cells  
according  to  the  MHC  of  the   thymes  were  sibse- qiently elegantly—and  even  more  
convincingly—confirmed with  T-cell  recep- tor  transgenic  mice,  by  H.   vein  Boehmer  and  
collaborators’*.  In  addition several other groups also analyzed  transgenic T-cell receptor 
expressing mice;
D. Loh with an alloreactive T-cell receptor⁷’ and H. P. Pircher, H. Hcnyartner,
T.   Mak   and    K.   Burki   with   an   Lt?MV-specific   receptor”;   others   used   a variety 
of additional specificities.
Nrw  rarinr.s. The  recognition  that  peptides  derived  from viruses,  bacteria, or  classical  
parasites  are  presented  to T-cells via  MHC class I or  class  II  mole- cules  immediately  
suggested  that  instead  of  live,  and   therefore  potentially

Rotf  M.  Zinkernagef                                                49

harmful,  infectious  agents,  peptides  could  possibly  be  used  as vaccines  to in- duce T-cell 
responses"'. This was first formally shown for virus-specific peptides in studies by M. Schulz, P. 
Aichele, and  H. Hengartner",  (Table  2, Fig. 2)  and then by K. Melief and  M. Kast and  
coworkers". The main problem which slow- ed    things   down   after    the   discovery   of   the  
  key   role   of   peptides   by
A. Townsend,  was  the  fact  that  the  half-life  of such  peptides  is  usually  short, and  
protective  T-cells could  therefore  only  be induced  with  the  help of adju- vants that 
guaranteed  the relatively slow, long-term release of peptides,  trigger- ing  T-cells  over  a  
prolonged  period  of  time  “.  Peptide  treatments  were  first shown  to  prevent  EAE  under  
various  conditions” ’".  More  recently,  the  ca- pacity of  peptides  to  induce  cytotoxic  
T-cells  so exhaustively  and  completely that  they  are  deleted  has  been  shown  by  D.  
Kyburz,  P.  Aichele,  H.P.  Pirc her and  H.  Hengartner,  and  D.  Moskophidis‘"”.  T-cells  were 
 either  induced  or exhausted, depending on the relative amount and kinetics of the available an- 
tigen within a recipient mouse  (Fig. 2) . Thus, with  too rnuc h  peptide, specific: T-cells could 
 be deleted for as long as the  peptide persisted—even permanent- ly, in  the  case of a 
thymectomized  host. This signalled  the  possibility of a “ne- gative” vaccination-strategy  (Fig. 
 2, Table  2) : Instead  of increasing  T-cell  pre- cursor  frequencies  to  enhance  protection   
(positive  vaccination) ,  one   could also  reduce  or  delete  T-cells  by  means  of  excess  
peptides  (negative  vaccina- tion) “". The   latter possibility may allow the  immunopathological, 
disease-rais- ing T-cells to be exhausted and deleted. Although  one such example has been 
documented  in  an  MHC class I-specific  immunopathological T-cell-mediated transgenic  diabetes  
model”,  attempts  to achieve  the  same  in  already  primed hosts, before or after initiation  of 
disease, have only met with  partial success.
/-rrll e iitof)e escape mutant viruses: It could be expected  that noncytopathic vi-

Table  2. The role of  antigen  localisation,  dose and time on “positive”  and  “negative” vac- 
cination.


vaccination

cyt‹ipathic  viruses localized          generalized
Infection with
ntincytopathic viruses
localized                            generalized
ch ori o iii c ri in gi ii s     su hen thin e‹i us

none
survival            death
death               disease
disease





positive
vaccination



protection       protection       protection       disease
(virus                (sh‹irter) eliminated)
(virus
eliminated)
death  or prr›tecti‹iri (virus eliminated)
negative                disease anct death                  Treated  mice mo n‹it develop disease 
anal vaccination  by      dependent  upon  critical      survive  but  do  not  eliminate virus 
“exhaustion”        role o1 cytt›tr›xic T-cells         (rlevelop carrier status).

Surnmarizcd  from P. Aichelc, 1994"; M. Schultz,  l991'ˡ; St. Oehen", P. Michele, 1595"", P. 
Aicliele, 1950¹'

50                                        Physiology  or  Medicine  1996



















10                              10














10




A0                10
GP33 peptide (pg)
Fig.  2.  Thr  rrel  o/' «n/tyen   lor‹ili.s atien   rind  of  do.sr   n url  fume  or  T-rell  
rr.sf›‹›ii.ir,s:   I he  I.C$1\^y1yctipro te i n  ) t Jet irltd UP  .,    ,  prcse med  by  MHt.  
class  I D'  in  CS 7  BL/ti  H-2'  m ice  was  used  as vaccine.  Its  li a1f-lif'e  iii  rind› is 
 << 1.2 h‹uirs;  ilie  read-on t c hose n in  th is expe ri meia t  t‹› assess d  cyto toxic  
specih c, 1.Ci M\' spc‹ ific  c}’tt›t‹  xi c T-c‹ 11  in r- uins it)  is  the  f old  p rotectiori  
ctim pared wi th ‹ ‹nrtrtils;  Pro tec tirin  was  titratecl  agaiiist  iiiiit›ii ii t  of  }  e pt 
icl‹  v i th arljuv'ans give n ei th‹•r  1  time or 3 times subcutaneou.sl)  (s.r . ) ‹›r  1  time 
or 3 tim‹ s inti apei ito n eal lb’ ( i.[i. ) .  No iii-
ductio n  was  st•e n  il  an tige n   is  ai'ailable  in  too  sus all  arntiun ts  (a)  ,  rii   
fin   i‹›o  short  a  pe ri‹id  ‹›l  It i iie  (li) , Induc tion  ref' a prtitective  inn mun c  
T-call  response  ‹occurs  ii sufhcie n t  aii tipcn  is ai'ailal9 I e liar 1‹n iy t iit,tip lj  (t 
) . In  con trast,  trio rn uch , cxcc.ssii e, indui:titan  of all in diiciblt- T-c c lis In    too 
 na ut:li an tilen  sp read t lii ‹›uglit›t1t  the organ is na  and  availal9le  for  tri‹i  long  
can ses  ex haiisti‹n+ /deletion   of  all  spa i‘ifi c  T-ccl 1s  (d)   .  M ‹,rli fi ccl  1 re rn 
Air hcle ct al. ,  1995”'.


ruses would mutate the 9-10 amino acid peptides recognized  by T-cells in the context of  the 
crucial  MHC class I antigen.  Mutation  of  this peptide, so that either  its presentation  by MHC 
 molecules  or  its recognition  by T-cells  is  no longer possible, cc›uld  help viruses to escape 
immune surveillance. A first ex- ample of  this  possibility  was fc›und  by chance when  H. P. 
Pircher,  D. Mosko-

Rolf  M.  Zinkernagel                                               51
phidis and  H. Hengartner  analyzed  T-cell  receptor  transgenic  mice  that ex- pressed  a T-cell 
 receptor  specific  for  the  LCMV  glycoprotein  peptide  33-41 presented  by the  MHC class I  
(Dᵇ) molecule'I' " (Fig. 3) . When  we infected such  mice  in  the footpad  we found  a very early 
swelling  reaction  caused  by immunopathological cytotoxic T-cell response  by day 2 to 4, which, 
however, waned, and  a second CTL-mediated  response was measurable after day S (Fig. 3).  When  
this unexpected  double  peak of  the T-cell-mediated footpad  swell- ing reaction was analyzed 
further, it became clear  that the virus had mutated by day 6 of infection; it no longer expressed  
the original  gp 34-41,  but exhi- bited  various  mutations  within  this  epitope,  presented  by 
 the  MHC  class  I (Dᵇ)  mo1ecule'¹.  Apparently   the  vehement  virtually  monoclonal  antiviral 
CD8“ T-cell  response  in  the  T-cell-receptor-transgenic mouse  had quickly se- lected  the 
T-cell-epitope-mutant virus that had escaped  the transgenic T-cells. A similar  mutant virus that 
escaped  the T-cell response  has subsequently  also been found in patients infected with  HIV by 
R. Phillips, A. McMichael  and co- workers’³ and  in HBV-infected  patients by Bertoletti  et a/.”.
MHC-disease  associations: The   linkage  between  some disease susceptibilities and  certain  
HLA-types  was one  of  the first findings signalling  the important role of MHC?-molecules in 
immunity  (reviewed in"  ’6). These diseases are of- ten  of  autoimmune  or  immunopathological  
nature  and  are  often  linked  to HLA  class  I,  rather  than  class  II,  molecules”.  The  
critical  role  of  modified MHC molecules in T-cell recognition explained why different allelic 
forms of

C57BL/6
us{        3  x10’ pfu
LCMV-WE
LCMV-WE   GP 32-42     GP 32-42   GP 32-42
Tyrjg• Phe   Value Leu
80
1     2.3.4.5.6     7     e     9.10.11.12
tg line                  tg line 327 102p.f.u. LCMV      1@ p.f.u. LCMV
10









2        4        8








2        4       8       15



0
20
0
30: 10: 3:1







30: 10: 3:1






-“
30: 10: 3:1






“
30: 10: 3:1
Days after infection                                                                            
Effector . Target ratio

wil rl-type  (wt)  w•is injv‹ tvd int‹i  the  footpad  (A) . The  c‹ ntrol. I .ñ 7BL /ti devcl‹iped 
 tht  expec ted €?DS* T-cell-rle- pcnrle nt l‹›u tparl swelli rig by clay G-7,  the TCiR-tg*327  
mice exliibitcd or i early  ewe 11 in g c at wed b}  th e  th-T(  k  s pm ci fic its i  
1.€.M4°C›P.,.,       plris  D'.   This early  response  seIce tcrl  a mutai i t virus S.7  by about 
d‹it 7—8,  t 1s;it  iii rl ucecl ii swe Hi rig  reactio n  b}  the  endciycn‹›us  r+tin-th  T-ce 
lls  specifi c  for  othe r peptirlc s.  Tli‹  virtis  ti Its rs  fi›i i rrel  in  th e splee n  
‹if  rn ice  i rife c tecl  with  a  low  ( lll" ptu)  ‹ir  a  high  ( 1 0"   pfu)  ciose  of  
Lt\MV-WE  is slitiwn  in  ( B).  All  iiiice were  i iili'c ted wi th  L.CMV Pvt; a variant  virris 
8.7 »'as se lec ted  in  tg  line'327  mice  in fee terl  wi th  111" pit i ‹›l' I.t.M\' 't  b)' 
da}' S  (B) . The  cytotr›xic  T-cell activity fiiii nd in  con trol Cñ 7 BL/G or   TCiR-ti327  rn 
ice ‹iii  rlay 8 is slur v'n  i n
I•.  The     pv ptides of  th e T-cell-epitope esea pc varian t vi rus are  n ot recog n i zecl  
liv the  th-T(?R,  but arL  sti 11  p;i rti- ally  (Tyr  •Pfie)  or  not  (Val    I.en)  recogn 
ized  lay  effect‹4r  T-t‘t 11s  try›th  co n trol  C37 B1./G  mice .  Su rn rnarizcd I i o in  Pi 
reher ct al.,  1990"'.

52                                            Physiology or Medicine  1996

MHC are randomly  distributed  in  the  population  and  made it likely  that in- fectious agents 
and  their peptides are presented  by at least one  of  the four to ten MHC molecules expressed  by 
an individual;  this minimizes the  possibility that a virus escapes immune surveillance, 
endangering survival of  the entire population.  The  fact  that some  differences  with  respect  
to  antigenicity  and immunogenicity are linked  to the MHC, and  correlate directly with different 
strengths of the T-cell responses, shows that different MHC molecules direct- ly determine and 
regulate  resistance to diseases.
Obviously, cytopathic viruses must be controlled efficiently by the immune system, otherwise  the  
host species dies. Therefore,  hosts with  non-responder or  non-presenting MHC-molecules  have  
probably  been  eliminated  long ago by natural selection, leaving only high  responders  to 
survive. In contrast, for noncytopathic  viruses,  diseases are  not  caused  by the infectious  
agent itself, but  rather by the damaging effect of protective T-cell responses. Because such 
agents do not directly cause disease,  they do  not  exert a direct selective  pres- sure on 
survival. But since these viruses may induce immunopathological cy- totoxic T-cell responses, 
differences in MHC may influence  the severity of the disease.  In fact,  many of  the diseases 
exhibiting some association  with  MHC have an aura of being autoimmune or immunopathologically 
mediated. This has been directly shown for known  noncytopathic viruses”'"  (Table 3) .


Table   3.  MHC-disease  association  reflecting   CD8+  T-cells  mediated  immunopathology
against host cells infected with noncytopathic  LCMV.

Mouse strain               A. Maximal increase of serum               B. Mortality after 
intracerebral transaminases after i.v. infection           infection with LCMV
with  LCMV  (pfu) : T-cell  mediated hepatitis
B  A       'UBCD
IO'    IO       102     iO6

BI0.G H-2D L             —              —                 —              ++
BI0.BR H—2D‘             —              —                 ++           *
100 %
100 %

Mice were infected i.v. with  the indicated doses of LCMV WEUB   A or D. Maximal  increases
‹if serum  transaminases were indicated with —: < 3 fold, +: 10-20 fold, ++: > 100 fold. Damage
or  liver  cells  ur of  choriomeningeal or ependymal  cells  caused  by LCMV-specific  €\D8“ T- 
cells.  In absence  ot  C?D8* T- no immuriopatholtigy is seen.
t/. Role of virus characteristics increasing likelihood  to establish persistent 1.CMMV-infection 
in mice


Virus parainete rs:


Host pararrieters:
Increased  replication  rate, increased  resistance  to interfer‹ins, loss o1 T-cell  epit‹apes  by 
 mutation,  increased  tr‹ pism  for  lyrnphohe- mr puietic cells.
Decrease in  relative interferon levels, luss tif presenting MHC class 1  molecules  (e.g  BAl B/c  
 dm2  mice) ,  loss  rat  I.DS'  T-r ells  (c .g. DBA/2  mice), loss of T-help, lack of IL-2.
Summarized  from  R. M. Zinker nagel, 1985"; T. P. Leist, 1989¹⁰';  D. Mrisktiphidis, 1954'"'.

Rolf  M.   Zinkernagel                                                 53

As  pointed  out  above,  one  of  the  motivations  for  testing  various  mouse strains for  
cytotoxic  T-cell  activity,  resulting in  the  discovery  of  MHC-restric- ted  T-cell 
recognition, was the  variable and  weak evidence of susceptibility dif- ferences  of  mice  to  
lethal  choriomeningitis  that  somehow  correlated  with MHC  (Table 4) . The  comparison  of a 
slowly replicating neurotropic strain of LCMV  (UBC-A) , with a rapidly  replicating viscerotropic  
isolate  UBC-D  char- acterized  by Ch.  Pfau”,  revealed a dramatic and strict correlation  with  
MHC when   the  different  diseases  were  studied.  After  intracerebral  infection  of mice, 
UBC-A virus caused death in all recipients, irrespective  of  MHC.  UBC- D caused 
immunopathological disease in all those possessing the  MHC class I H-2D'1L* allele  but  not  in  
the  others"' """.  Furthermore,  the susceptibility of mice  to  becoming  persistently  infected  
virus-carriers could  be  linked  by  D. Moskophidis  to the  absence  of class I MHC molecules  
that were  able  to  pre- sent   the   critically   important   dominant   immunogenic   viral   
peptide¹"'  "’". These studies, in  addition,  demonstrated  that virus dose and  virus strain  
(in- cluding T-cell epitope variants)  also played an important role in the overall vi- rus-host  
balance and  in MHC-disease  association.

Table 4. Transmission of  protective  immuiiity from mother to offspring.
Because of MHC-restriction of T-cell recognition, T-cell maturation  in offspring is slow and 
starts after birth  to prevent graft-versus host disease. During  this period of physiological  im- 
mu no  incompetence  transfer  of  maternal  antibody-memor y  is essential  for  protection  of 
offspring against  many infections.



placenta
preexistent  antibodies                                     “activated” T-cells
maternal antibodies transmissible               non-transmissible, danger ref hrist- except with 
chorio-epithelial double          versus-graft  disease and  rejection layered  placenta  (bovines) 
*

milk
transmissible via gut  of offspring (temporarly)  passive  protection  in gut*
evidence  poorly analyzed

function
“altruistic”:  protection  of  offspring               egoistic: protection  of  original ho.st 
against infectious diseases during  the        against spread of non-cytopathic period of T-cell  
immunodeficiency             infectious agents  (controls immuno- and  protect mothers during       
                  pathology and  tumcir cells within pregnancy                                      
                  host)

*Summarized  in  Brambell''""

Thus MHC  (in  humans  HLA-) —disease  association  may not  be found  readily for acute cytopathic 
viral or  bacterial infections, because natural selection  has favoured  good  MHC-presenter-virus  
combinations"’.  In  contrast,  for  non- cytopathic viruses,  the selection  pressures are  much 
weaker and  various viris- htist immune  response  balances resulting in  more  or less 
immunopathologi- cal   disease   are   acceptable   for   species   stir vival.   Because   
cytotoxic   and protective T-cell responses directly depend  upon class I MHC prescntatic›n  of 
peptides,  susceptibility  to  consequential  disease  may  correlate  directly  with the  MHC 
class I allele, depending  upon  the localisation  of infection  (chorio- meningitis vs. 
establishment  of a virus carrier status)" '"¹.

54                Physiolo     or Medicine  1996

One  may  therefore  extrapolate  that  at  least  some  autoimmune  diseases may eventually turn 
out to be caused by immunopathological T-cell responses against  viruses  that  are  poorly  
cytopathic  or  noncytopathic""  ""  (Fig.  3,  4). Hepatitis  B,  C,  OY   D  virus  infections  
or   possibly  immunodeficiency  virus (HIV)  infections in  man  may represent  this type of  
chronic infection  leading to a  protective  but  immunopathological T-cell  response, causing  
MHC-regu- lated  immunopathologic  disease.  Alternatively, infectious  agents  that are  ei- ther 
unknown or not yet recognized  may be involved initially in  triggering  the disease by 
immunopathological or autoimmune mechanisms.  For example, it is suspected  that also common  
cytopathic  viruses may  be involved  in  the  pa- thogenesis  of  some  autoimmunity  diseases  
(Fig.  4,  5).   Infections  of“  MHC class-I-positive  epithelial  or  neiiroendocrine  cells  
should  be  contrcilled  pri- marily via C?D8’ T-cells;  their efficiency will, therefore,  not 
only determine  the extent and  kinetics of destruction  of infected  host cells,  but  also 
whether  an autoimmune  T-cell and  B cell resptinse against such sequestered self-antigens is 
induced.
The  reason  for  MHC class I linkage  of autoimmune  diseases is,  therefore, probably in sc›me 
diseases  that the autoimmune  effector T-cells are  class I  re- stricted  (Fig. 4) , and   in  
other situations  that modulations  of common  or  un- recognized  infections by the  efficiency of 
class-I-restrictecl effector T-cells tray inclirectly regulate autoantibody  responses  (Fig. 5) .




IMMUNOPROTECTION
againat cytopathic   viruses: critical



againat noncytopathic viruses:

IMMUNOPATHOLOGY
IMMUNOPATHOLOGY:            AUTOIMMUNITY:
Virus known                     Virus not known unrecognized endogenous



ciiust•cl  liv irn i n une  nice h.ui isrn.s.  II  the rims  is n‹it rt'c‹i(nizerl  or is u n 
knou'n,  the dise‹, s‹-  rum  be  rn istiike n  its a i i  ;i i itoiiii iii imc rliscasc.

Rolf  M.  Zinkernagel                                               55










CD8” To anti-V^                         CD8’ To anti-V‘
-I-+-€   HLA cll  At                                A      HLA cl1 Ay
Fig. 5.  Auloimmunit5 induced  6f  viruses. If a cytopathic or noncytopathic  virus is stopped 
early enough  by MHC?- class  I-(HLA-cI  1 @)-restricted  effector  T-cells  (A) ,  sensitive  
target  cells  are  not  destroyed.  If  the  protective HLA-cl I A, „-restricted  T-cell 
resp‹›rrse is slow  (B), mms may reach sensitive  target organs and cells that may tie rtcstroyed 
directly or induce disea.se by T-cell-mediated immtinopathologv, i.e. cause release of self  
(S)-antigen. The self-antigen  may then  be picked  up and  presented  by APC  (C?)  and in  local  
lymph  node or in  the spleen induce  autoimmune  T-cells and   or autoantibodies. Autoantibody  
production  needs T-help  that  may be  pro- vided  by  newly  induced  t?D4* T-cells  specific  
either for  viral  antigens  that  are  linked  to self-antigens  ur arc specific for so far 
segregated  immunologically  ignored self-antigens.


Consequences  for  immunological  rrcorJ.  The  discovery  that  T-cell  specificity monitored MHC 
molecules,  that it was positively selected  in  the thymus,  and that  this  explained  the  
transplantation  reaction,  offered  a  basis  for  under- standing  the  role of protective  
immunological  memory.  Immunological  me- mory by B and T-cells is an important hallmark of 
immunity and has been ex-
ploited   successfully   by  vaccinations   (reviewed   in ¹0" ’06).   However,   before
vaccinations  were used,  the idea of immunological  memory had  two  raisons d'étre.  One  could  
argue  that if a host dies during  the primary  infection,  he does not need an immunological  
memory. Also, if he survives the primary in- fection,  he does  not need memory because  the system 
 has proven  itself effi- cient.  What  then  is  the  function  of  immunological  memory?  The  
first  and most  critical  one  is via  transfer  of  immune  antibodies  of the  mother  to  pro- 
tect  offspring  during  the  phase  of maturation  of  the  immune  system  after birth, the 
second is to protect mothers from infections during pregnancy  (re- viewed  in ˡ0fia' b).  I will 
only discuss the first aspect further here.
Calves are  born  without  antibodies  because,  as for all vertebrates,  the  im- mune  system   
is  not   yet  mature   enough   to  produce  its  own  antibody  re- sponse'⁰⁶ᵃ  (Table  4).  In  
addition,  in  calves,  maternal  antibodies  cannot  be transmitted  because  of the complete  
doubly  layered  placenta.  All  protective antibodies are transmitted via colostral milk from the 
mother within 24 hours of birth. If this does not happen, the calf dies within a few weeks as a 
result of common  bacterial  infections.
Why  then,  are  newborn  vertebrates  immunoincompetent?  (Table  4).  My explanation  is,  that  
because  of  MHC-restricted T-cell  recognition,  T-cells  of

56                                        Physiology or Medicine  1996

the fetus should  not mature, so as not  to endanger  pregnancy, or cause graft- versus-host  
disease  against  maternal  MHC  molecules’⁰ ¹⁰⁶. The  passively  ac- quired  antibodies  provide  
protection  during  the  critical  period  after  birth, during which T-cell and  B-cell maturation 
slowly takes place over 3—6 months in  humans,  or  four  weeks  in  mice.  Since  maternal  
antibodies  must  cover  a wide spectrum of relevant infectious agents that may not  be encountered 
dur- ing  pregnancy,  immunological  memory  carried  by  antibodies  is  mandatory for at least  
two reasons. Firstly,  pregnancy  is relatively short compared  to  the time  taken for  the  host 
to reach sexual  maturity,  and  therefore antibody  me- mory must be developed  over a long 
period. Secondly,  the relevant infections must not  occur during  pregnancy,  because  many 
infections cause damage  to and  abortion  of  the  foetus.
Evidence  has been found in various models and  infections  that persistence of  antigens  both,  
in  antibody-antigen  complexes  and  exposed  on  follicular dendritic  cells,  maintains  
antibody  responses  for  many  (Table  5)  years,  to guarantee levels of  transmissible  
protection’⁰’*”’

Table S. “Memory B-cells” are  not  protective whereas preexistent neutralizing levels of an- 
tibodies protect naive recipients against cytopathic infectious agents.
Adoptive  transfer  to naive  mice             Booster immunization  2 d                Result of  
chal-
before challenge infections             lenge infection


B-cells,  naive or  normal

“primed” ‹ir “memory” B-cells
no                                                         disease
yes                                                         disease
no                                                         ctisease
yes                                                         disease
iin mune serum with  neutralizing          no                                                       
      protection
antibodies                                                    yes                                   
                         protection

Summarized  from  experiments  performed  in mice with vesicular  stomatitis virus  (VSV)  in 
refs.: U. Steinhoff, 1995¹";  M. F. Bachmann, 1994' I*

What  then is the  role of T-cell memory?
Memory T-cells are  probably necessary to maintain  memory B cells but  this is not  yet certain. 
Although increased precursor frequencies of T-cells provide some  protection,  which should suffice 
 to protect mothers during pregnancy, there  is a second  very important  aspect  of T-cell  
memory.  T-cells  are  critical for  controlling  persisting  noncytopathic  viruses  that  hide  
in  peripheral  epi- thelial or  mesenchymal  cells and  prevent them from reemerging  to trigger 
T- cell mediated immunopathological disease  (Table 4) . There is good evidence available   now   
that   these   protective   T-cells  are   also   maintained   by  anti- gens"’6 ' "  ' ' ',  
although  this  simple  notion  is  very  controversial  at  the  pre- sent  time’02 ’’2 ' ’".  
Thus,  low  levels  of  ongoing  T-cell  responses  reflect  anti- gen-driven  activated  effector  
T-cells  and   not  special  memory  T-cells.  These serve  to  protect  the  host itself  and  not 
 progeny;  these  egoistic protective  me- mory T-cells cannot be transmitted, due  to 
MHC-differences between  mother and  offspring  (Table  4) . Taken  together,  the  summarized  
evidence  suggests that  because  of  MHC-restricted  T-cell  recognition  which  causes  the   
trans-

Rolf  M.  Zinkernagel                                             57

plantation  reaction,  prolonged  physiological  immunodeficiency  of  the  off- spring  is  
necessary;  protection  during  the  period  of  maturation  of  the  im- mune  system  is provided 
 by passively  transferred  altruistic antibodies,  which necessitate  a  mandatory  antigen-driven 
 elevated  antibody  level  in  mothers (Table 4).

CONCLUSIONS
In  the complex  balance  between  viruses and  hosts T-cells  play an  important role  that varies 
with  different  host and  viral characteristics. The  unexpected finding,  by chance  and  
necessity,  of  MHC-restricted  T-cell  recognition,  in  a field of biological science  prepared  
by immunologists, geneticists and  virolo- gists, has triggered a great number of subsequent 
important studies by many other  groups,  resulting  in  an  excellent  molecular  understanding  
of  T-cell recognition of virally infected  target cells. These combined findings have help- ed  to 
understand  better  both  immunological  specificity  and  immunological memory. They have 
furthered our understanding of disease pathogenesis and made possible applications of the  acquired 
 knowledge for improving  protec- tive immunity and for diminishing immunopathological T-cell 
responses.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Looking  back over  the past 28 years of  my professional  life since graduating from  medical  
school  and  marrying  my wife  Zathrin,  I  must  admit  life  has been  very good  to me. I was 
given  the chance  to work and  spend  time with many  excellent scientists and  good  friends as 
well as many eager  young stu- dents and  postdocs.  I am  part of  a caring family, I have  the  
luck  to discover new  things  every  once  in  a while,  while  I  am  paid  a salary  for  
enjoying  re- searching  (in the true sense of the  word)  the secrets of nature.
I thank my families, my mentors, and  my collaborators for all these years. I would also like  to  
thank the universities of Basel, Zurich and  Lausanne,  and especially the John Curtin School of 
Medical Research, Professor G. Ada and
R. V. Blanden.  I am also greatly indebted  to  the  Schweizerische Stiftung fur 
Biologisch-medizinische  Stipendien,   the  Australian  National  University  in Canberra,  the 
SCRIPPS Clinic and  Research Foundation  in La Jolla, CA, the NIH, the Canton of Zurich, the Swiss 
Federal Government, the Swiss National Science  Foundation,  the University of Zurich, and  the 
Fondation Jeantet for their generous financial support.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.     Landsteiner,  K. The specificitf  of serological reactions   Harvard  University Press, 
Boston, 1945) .
2.     Klein, J.  Biology  of the mouse histocompatibili}-2 complex  (  Springer Ltd. 1975) .
3.     Dausset, J.  Acta Haematol.  (Basel)  20, 156—I66  ( 1958).
4.     Hotchin, J.  Cold  Spring Harbor Symp.  Quant. Biol. 2'7, 479-499  (1962).
5.     Lehmann-Grube, F.  Strol. Monogr.  10,  I—173  ( 1971).

58                                       Physioloff   or Medicttte  1996

6.     Buchmeier,  M. J.,  Welsh,  R. M., Dutko, F.J. & Oldstone,  M. B. A.  Ads. lirmitaof.  30,
275—331  (1980).
7.     Brunner,  K.  T.,  Mauel, J.,  Cerottini, J.  C.  &  Chapuis,  B.  Immunology  14,  181—196 
(1968) .
B.     Cerottini, J. C., Nordin, A. A. & Brunner, K  T. Nature 228, 1308—1309  (1970) .
9.     Gardner, I., Bowern,  N. A. & Blanden, R. V. Eur. J. Immunol. 4, 63-67 (1974) . 10.     
Marker, O. & Volkert, M. /.  Exp. Med. 137, 1511—1525  (1973) .
11.     Cole, G. A. Nathanson,  N, f. Prendergast, R. A. Nature 238, 335—337  (1972) .
12.     Zinkernagel,  R. M. & Doherty,  P.C.J. Exp. Med. 138, 1266—1269  (1973) .
Oldstone,  M.  B.,  Dixon,  F. J.,   Mitchell,  G.  F.  &  McDevitt,  H.  O. J Exp.  Med.  137,
1201—1212  (1973) .
14.     Blanden, R. V. /.  €xQ. Med. 133, 1074—1089  (1971) .
l5.       Zinkernagel,  R. M. & Doherty, P. C. Nature 248, 701—702  (1974) . 16.     Mackaness, 
G.B.J. Exp. Med. 116, 381—406  (1962) .
17.     Shearer, G. M. Eur. ]. Immunol. 4, 527—533  (1974) .
18.     Gorer, P. A.  Brit. }. Exp. Pathol. 17, 42—50  (1936) .
19.     Snell, G.D.J.Genet. 49, 87—108  (1948) .
20.     Van  Rood, J.J. & Van Leeuwen, A. /.  Crim.  In-rest. 42, 1382—1390  (1963) .
21.     Levine, B. B., Ojeda, A. P. & Benacerraf,  B.     Exp. Med. 118, 95S—957  (1963) . 
McDevitt, H. O. & Sela, M.J. Exp. Med. 122, 517—531  (1965) .
23.     McDevitt, H. O.  & Chinitz, A.  Science 163, 1207—1210  (1969) . 24.     Lilly, F., Boyse, 
E. A. & Old, L.J. Lancet 2, 1207-1209  (1964) .
25.     McDev'itt,  H.  O., Deak,  B. D., Shreffler,  D. C., Klein, J.,  Stimpfling, J.  H. & 
Snell, G. D. /.  Exp. Med. 135, 1259—1278  (1972) .
26.     Burnet, F. M. Nature 245, 359—361  (1972) .
27.     Bodmer, W. F. Nature 237, 139—145  (1972) .
28.     Benacerraf,  B. & McDevitt,  H. O. Science 175, 27S—279  (1972) .
29.     Amos, D. B., Bodmer, W. F., Ceppellini, R., Condliffe, P. G., Dausset, J. & Fahey, J.  L.
Fed. Proc. 31, 1087—1104  (1972) .
30.    Jerne,   N. K. Eur. ]. Immunol. 1, l —9  (1971) .
31.     Lawrence, H. W. Physiol.         39, 811—859  ( 1959) .
32.     Bailey, D. W., Snell, D. G. & Cherry, M. Proceedings of the Symposium on Immunogeiietics of 
the H-2 System. S. Karger AG. , Basel, Switzerland  55,  (1971) .
33      Fathman, C. G. & Hengartner, H. Nature 2'f2, 617-618  (1978) .
34      von  Boehmer,  H.,  Hengartner,  H.,  Nabholz,  M.,  Ler nhardt, W., Schreier,  M.  H.  & 
Haas, W. Eur. ] Immunol. 9, 592—597  (1979) .
35.     happier, J.  W.,  Skid more,  B.,  White, J.  &  Marrack,  P. /  ñx§.  Med.  153,  
1198—1214 (1981) .
56.     Kappler, J.,  Kubo, R., Haskins, K,  et al. Cell 35, 295—302  (1983) . 3'7.     McIntyre,  
B. W. & Allison, J.  P.  Cell 34, 739—746  (1983) .
38.     Hedrick,  S.  M.,  Cohen,  D.  I.,  Nielsen,  E.  A.  &  Davis,  M.  M.  Nature  308,  
149—153 (1984) .
39.     Yanagi,  Y., Yoshikai, Y., Leggett,  K., Clark, S. P., Aleksander,  I. &  Mak, T. W.  
Nature
308, 145—149  (1984) .
40.     Leclerc, J. C., Gomard, E., Plata, F. & Levy, J.  P.  Int. ]. Cancer 11, 42€›-432  (1973) .
41.     Lavrin,  D.  H.,  Herbermann,  R.  B.,  Nunn,  M.  & Soares,  N. /.   Natl.  Cancer  Inst. 
51, 1497—1508  (1973) .
41.a   Cole, G. A. Prendergast, R. A. & Henney, C. S. Fed.Proc. 32, 964  (1973a) .
42.     Kindred, B. & Shreffler, D. C./. Immunol. 109, 940—943  (1972) . 43.     McCullagh, P.J.J. 
Exp. Med. 132, 91d—925  (1970) .
44.     Katz, D. H., Hamaoka, T. & Benacerraf,  B.J. top. Med. 137, 1405—1418  (1973) .
45.     Rosenthal, A. S. & Shevach, E.M.J. ñx§. Med. 138, 1194—1212  (1973) .
46.     Blanden,  R. V., Doherty,  P. C., Dunlop,  M. B., Gardner,  I. D., Zinker nagel,  R. M. & 
David, C. S. Nature 254, 269—270  (1975) .
47      Koszinowski,  U. & Ertl, H. Nature 255, 552—554  (1975) .

Rolf  M.  Zinkernagel                                                  59

48.     Gordon, R. D., Simpson,  E. & Samelson,  L.E.J. Exp.  Med. 142,  1108—1120  ( 1975) .
49.     von Boehmer,  H., Haas, W. & Jer ne, N. K. Proc. Natl.  Acad. .SP. U.   S. A. 75, 2439—2442

50.     Bevan,  M. J.  Nature 256, 419—421  (1976) .
si.      McMichael,  A. J.,  Ting,  A.,  Zweerink,  H. J.  &  Askonas,  B.  A.  Nafttre  270,  
524-526
(\9'77) .
52      Goulmy,  E.,  Termijtelen,  A.,  Bradley,  B. A.  &  Van  Rood, J. J.  Naturr  266,  
544-b45
(I9’77) .
Lafferty,  K.J. & Cunningham,  A.J. Aust. ].  Exp.  Biol.  Med.  Sci. 53, 27—42  ( 1976).
54.     Bretscher,  P. & Cohn, M.  Science  169,  1042—1049  ( 1970) .
55.     €?ohn,  M. & Langman,  R. E. Immunol.  Re-u.  115,  11-147  ( 1990) .
56.     Zinkernagel,  R. M. & Doherty,  P. C. Nature 251, 547—545  ( 1974). Doherty,  P. C. & Zin 
kernagel, R. M.     Immunol.  114, 30-33  ( 1975) .
Gardner, I. D., Bowern, N. A. & Blanden,  R. V. F.ur. ].  Immunol.  5,  122—127  ( 1975) . Zin 
kernagel, R. M. Nature 251, 230—'233  ( 1974) .
60.     Doherty, P. C. & Zinkernagel, R. M. Lancet  1,  l40d—1409  ( 1975) .
Babbitt,  B.  P.,  Allen,  P.  M.,  Matsueda,  G.,  Haber,  E.  &  Unanue,  E.  R.  Nature  317,
35S—360  ( 1985) .
62.      Buns,  S.,  C?olon,  S.,  Smith,  C., Freed, J.  H.,  Miles,  C. & Grey,  H. M. Poor.  
Natl.  Arm.
.SrL  f7. .S.  A. 83, 3968—3971  ( 1986) .
63.      Townsend,   A.   R.   M.,   Rothbard,  J.,   Gotch,   F.   M.,   Bahadur,   G.,   Wraith,  
 D.   & McMichael, A. J.  d.ell 44, 959—968  ( 1986).
64.      Maryanski, J.  L.,  Pala,  P.,  Corradin,  G., Jordan,  B. R. & Cerottini, J.  C.  Nature 
324,
678—S79  ( 1986) .
Rotzschke,  O., Falk, K,  Deres, K., ct al. Naturr 348, 252-254  ( 1990) .
66.      Lurquin,  C., van  Pel, A., Marianne,  B., et al. Cell 58, 293—303  ( 1989).
67.      Bjorkman, P. J.,   Saper, M. A., Samraoui,  B., Bennett, W. S., Strominger, J.  L. & 
Wiley, D. C. Nuture 329,  LOG-ñ 11  ( 1957) .
68.      Bjorkman, P. L., Saper, M. A., Samraoui,  B., Bennet, W. S., Strominger, J.  L. & Wiley, 
D. C. Nature 329,  512—51 S ( 19S7).
65.     Garcia, K. C., Degano,  M., Stanfield,  R. L., et a1.  Science 274,  209—219  ( 1956) .
70.     C•arboczi,  D. N., Ghosh, P., Utz, U., Fan, Q. R., Biddison, W. E. & Wiley,  D. C?. N‹sture
384,  134—I 41  ( 1996).
71.    Jorgensen, J.  L.,  Esser,  U., de  St.Groth,  B. F., Reay,  P. A. &  Davis,  M. M. Naturr. 
355,
224—230  ( 1992).
Sant’Angelo,  D.  B., Waterbury,  G., Preston-Hurlburt,  P., et a1.  Immunity  4,  3b7—376 (1996).
73       Bevan, M. J.  Nature 269,  417—418  ( 1977) .
74       Zinkernagel,  R.  M.,  Callahan,  G.  N.,  Klein, J.  &  Den n ert,  C.  Nature  271,  
251—2.93 (1978).
Zinkernagel,  R. M., Callahan,  G. N., Althage, A., Cooper, S., Klein, P. A. & Klein, J. /.
Exp.  Med.  147, 882—896  ( 1978) .
76.     Zinkernagel,  R.  M.,  Althage,  A.,  Water field,  E.,  et  al. J.  Exp.  Med.   151,  
376—399 ( 1980) .
77.     Kisielow,  P.,  Teh,  H.  S.,  Bluthmann,  H.  &  von  Boehmer,  H.  Naturr  335,  730—733 
( 1988).
78.     Sha, W. C., Nelson, C. A., Newberry,  R. D., Kranz,  D. M., Russell, J.  H. & Loh, D. Y.
Nature 336, 73—76  ( 1988) .
79.      Pircher,  H., Mak, T. W., Lang, R., et al. £MBOJ 8, 719—727  ( 1989) .
80.      Deres,  K,  Schild,  H., Wiesmuller,  K. H., Jung,  G. & Rammensee,  H.  G. Natuir. 342,
56I—564  (1989).
81.     Schultz,  M.,  Zinkernagel,  R.  M. &  Hengartner,  H.  Poor.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  U.  S.  
A.  88, 991—993  (1991).
82.     Kast,  W.  M.,  Roux,  L.,  Curreri, J.,  é/ o/.  Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  U.  S.  A.  
88,  2283—2287 ( 1991).

60                                      Physiology or Medicine  1996

83.      Widmann,   C.,   Maryanski,  J.   L.,   Romero,   P.   &  Corradin,   G.  /.   Immunol.   
147,
3745—3751  ( 1991).
84       Clayton, J.  P., Gammon,  G. M., Ando,  D. G., Kono, D. H., Hood, L. & Sercarz,  E. E.
].  Exp. Med.  169, 1681—1691  (1989).
85.     Gaur,  A.,  Wiers,  B.,  Liu, A.,  Rothbard, J.  &  Fathman,  C.  G.  Science 258,  
1491—1494 ( 1992).
86.      Kyburz, D., Aichele, P., Speiser, D. E., Hengartner, H., Zinker nagel, R. M. & Pircher, H. 
ñur J.  Immunol.  23,  l95d—1962  (1993).
87.      Aichele,  P., Kyburz, D., Ohashi, P. S., et al. Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  U.  S.  A. 91, 
444—448 ( 1994).
88.     Oehen,  St, Hengartner, H. & Zinkernagel,  R. M. Science 251,  195-198  (1991).
88a.   Aichele,  P., Brduscha Riem, K., Zinkernagel,  R. M., Hengartner,  H. & Pircher,  H. P.
].  Exp. Med.  182, 261—266  ( 1995).
89.     Moskophidis,  D., Lechner, F., Pircher,  H. & Zinker nagel, R. M. Nature 362, 758—761 
(1993).
90.      Zinker nagel, R. M.  Science 21I,  173—178  (1996).
91.      Pircher,  H., Moskophidis,  D., Rohrer,  U., Burki, K., Hengartner,  H. & Zinkernagel, R. 
M. Nature 346,  629—633  (1990).
92.     Aebischer,  T., Moskophidis,  D., Rohrer, U. H., Zinkernagel,  R. M. & Hengartner,  H.
Proc. Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  U.  S.  A. 88,  11047—11051  (1991).
93       Phillips, R. E., Rowland-Jones, S., Nixon, D. F., Gotch, F. M., Edwards, J.  P., Ogunlesi, 
A. O. & McMichael, A.J. Nature 354,  453—459  (1991).
94.     Bertoletti,  A.,  Sette, A., Chisari,  F. V., Penna, A., Levrero,  M. & De Carli,  M.  
Nature
369,  407—410  (1994).
95.     Dausset, J.  & Svejgaard, A. HLA   and disease ( 1977). Munksgaard,  Copenhagen.
96.     Moller,  E., Bohme, J.,  Valugerdi,  M.A.,  Ridderstad,  A. &  Olerup,  O.  Drum.        .  
118, 5—19  (1990).
97.     Zinker nagel, R. M. & Doherty,  P. C. Ads. Immunol.  2'f, 51—177  (1979).
98.     Zinkernagel,  R. M.,  Pfau,  C. J.,  Hengartner,  H. & Althage,  A.  Nature  316,  614—O17 
(1985).
99.     Pfau, C. J.,  Valenti, J.  K,  Pevear, D. C. & Hunt, K  D. /. Exp. Med. 156,  79—89  ( 
1982).
100.     Leist, T. P., Althage, A., Haenseler,  E., Hengartner,  H. & Zinkernagel,  R.M.J. ñx§.
Med.  170, 269-277  ( 1989) .
101.     Moskophidis,  D., Lechner, F., Hengartner, H. & Zinkernagel,  R. M. /. Immunol.  152,
4974—4983  (1994).
102.     Moskophidis,  D., Battegay, M., van den Broek, M. F., Laine, E., Hoffmann Rohrer, U. & 
Zinkernagel,  R. M. /. Gen.  Virol. 1â, 381—391  (1995).
103.     Gray, D. & Leanderson,  T. Curr  Top. Microbiol.  Immunol.  159,  1—17  ( 1990) . 104.     
Jamieson,  B. D. & Ahmed, R./. Exp. Med.  169,  1993—2005  ( 1989) .
105.     Beverley, P. C. Immunol.  Today  11, 20W205  ( 1990).
106.     Zinkernagel,  R.  M.,  Bachmann,   M.  F.,  Kiindig,  T.  M.,  Oehen,  S.,  Pircher,  H.  
& Hengartner,  H.  Annu. Reu Immunol.  14, 333—367  ( 1996) .
106a.    Brambell,    R.W.R.   The   Transmission    of   Immunity   from    Mother    to   Young, 
Amsterdam,  North Holland  (1970).
106b.   Mfiller,   G.  Immunology   of  Feto-Maternal   Relationship   Immunol.   Reu.   75,  6—230 
( 1983) .
107.     Bachmann,  M.  F.,  Odermatt,  B.,  Hengartner,  H. &  Zinkernagel,  R.M.J. Exp.  Nlrd.
183, 2259—2269 (1996).
108.     Steinhoff, U., Muller, U., Schertler, A., Hengartner, H., Aguet, M. & Zinker nagel, R. M. 
;f Virol. 69, 2l5S-2158  (1995) .
109.     Gray, D. & Skar vall, H. Nature 336, 70—73  (1988) .
110.     Bachmann,  M.  F.,  Kiindig,  T.  M.,  Hengartner,  H.  &  Zinker nagel,  R.  M.  Pror.  
Natl. Arod. Sd.  U.S.A. 94, 640—645  (199'7).

lll.
Kiindig,  T.  M.,  Bachmann,  M.  F.,  Ohashi,  P.  S.,  Pircher,  H.,  Hengartner,  H.  & Zinker 
nagel, R. M.  Immunol.  Reu. 150, 6S-90  (1996) .

Rolf  M.   Zinkernagel                                                 61

112.     Hc›u, S.,  Hyland,  L.,  Ryan,  K. W.,  Portner,  A.  &  Doherty,  P. C.  Nature 369, 
652-664 ( 1994) .
113.     Lan,  L.  L., Jamieson,  B.  D., Somasundaram,  T.  &  Ahmed,  R.  Nature 369,  G4S—b52 ( 
1994) .
1 14.     Aichele,  P.,  Hengartner,  H.,  Zinkernagel,  R.  M.  &  Schultz,  M.   f.  Exp.  Med.  
171, I 815—1820  (1990) .
1 I oT .     Bachmann, M. F., Kundig, T. M., Odermatt, B., Hengartner, H. & Zinkernagel,  R. M.
]. Immunol. 153, 338d—3397  (1994) .






Erratum

Page  4, line  23 should  read as:

responses towards invading microorganisms or against cancer metastases. Our
