                    SANTIAGO R        A M Ó N Y    C   AJAL



        The structure and connexions of neurons
                       Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1906



In accordance with the tradition followed by the illustrious orators honoured
before me with the Nobel Prize, I am going to talk to you about the principal
results of my scientific work in the realm of the histology and physiology of
the nervous system.
   From my researches as a whole, there derives a general conception which
comprises the following propositions :
1. The nerve cells are morphological entities, neurons, to use the word
brought into use by the authority of Professor Waldeyer. My celebrated col-
league Professor Golgi has already demonstrated this property with respect
to the dendritic or protoplasmic processes of the nerve cells; but at the be-
ginning of our research there were only vague conjectures as regards the
behaviour of the axon branches and collaterals. We applied Golgi’s method,
firstly in the cerebellum and then in the spinal cord, the cerebrum, the ol-
factory bulb, the optic lobe, the retina and so on of embryos and young
animals, and our observations revealed, in my opinion, the terminal arrange-
ment of the nerve fibres. These fibres, ramifying several times, always proceed
towards the neuronal body, or towards the protoplasmic expansions around
which arise plexuses or very tightly bound and rich nerve nests. The peri-
cellular baskets and the climbing plexuses, and other morphological struc-
tures, whose form varies according to the nerve centres being studied, con-
firm that the nerve elements possess reciprocal relationships in contiguity but
not in continuity. It is confirmed also that those more or less intimate contacts
are always established, not between the nerve arborizations alone, but bet-
ween these ramifications on the one hand, and the body and protoplasmic
processes on the other. A granular cement, or special conducting substance
would serve to keep the neuron surfaces very intimately in contact.
   These facts, recognized in all the nerve centres with the aid of two very
different methods (that of Golgi and that of Ehrlich), confirmed and notably
developed by the research of Kölliker, von Lenhossék, Retzius, Van Gehuch-
ten, Lugaro, Held, my brother, Athias, Edinger, and many others, imply
three physiological postulates:


               NEURONS: STRUCTURE AND CONNEXIONS                                  221

   (a) As nature, in order to assure and amplify the contacts, has created com-
plicated systems of pericellular ramifications (systems which become incom-
prehensible within the hypothesis of continuity), it must be admitted that
the nerve currents are transmitted from one element to the other as a con-
sequence of a sort of induction or influence from a distance.
   (b) It must also be supposed that the cell bodies and the dendrites are, in
the same way as the axis cylinders, conductive devices, as they represent the
intermediary links between afferent nerve fibres and the afore-mentioned
axons. This is what Bethe, Simarro, Donaggio, ourselves, etc. have confirmed
quite recently by demonstrating, with the aid of neurofibrillar methods, a
perfect structural concordance between the dendrites and the prolongation
of the axon cylinder.
   (c) The examination of the movement of nervous impulses in the sensory
organs such as the retina, the olfactory bulb, the sensory ganglia and the
spinal cord, etc. proves not only that the protoplasmic expansions play a con-
ducting role but even more that nervous movement in these prolongations
is towards the cell or axon, while it is away from the cell in the axons. This formula,
called the dynamic polarization of neurons, originated a long time ago by Van
Gehuchten and us as an induction from numerous morphological facts, is
not in contradiction with the new research on the constitution of nerve proto-
plasm. Indeed we will see that the neurofibrillar framework constitutes a con-
tinuous reticulum from the dendrites and the cell body to the axon and its
peripheral termination.
   During twenty-five years of continued work on nearly all the organs of
the nervous system and on a large number of zoological species, I have never
met a single observed fact contrary to these assertions, and yet I have used in
my research, in addition to the usual processes of coloration, the chosen meth-
ods of Golgi, Cox, Ehrlich and lastly the neurofibrillar methods. Let us add
that the same doctrine also arises out of the assemblage of observations of
Kölliker, von Lenhossék, Van Gehuchten, my brother, Edinger, Lugaro, etc.,
on the nervous system of the vertebrates and from those very important ob-
servations of Retzius on the nervous system of the invertebrates.
    I ought now to review the principal observations on which the preceding
deductions are based. This would also be the best way to show you the scope
and the extent of my modest personal contribution to the knowledge of the
nemous system. Unfortunately, it is absolutely impossible to cover in a few
pages all the morphological facts whose description occupies a large number
of brochures containing hundreds of drawings. However, in order not to


222                        1906 S. RAMÓN Y CAJAL

put too great a strain on your very kind attention, I will limit myself to
choosing from all my works several striking examples of interneuronal con-
nexion, which I have reproduced schematically in the pictures which follow:
  First of all, let us look at the connexions of the sensory roots of the spinal
cord. We know well, from the researches of Ranvier, Retzius and of von




                                    Fig.   I


                 NEURONS: STRUCTURE AND CONNEXIONS                                 223
Lenhossek, etc., that the single prolongation of the sensory corpuscles is di-
vided into two branches: one external branch which leads to the periphery to
end in the skin, or in the mucous membranes; another internal branch which
penetrates the sensory or posterior root to end in the dorsal column of the
spinal cord. This last branch, from my observation in birds, reptiles and mam-
mals (confirmed by a large number of scientists such as Kölliker, von Len-
hossék, Retzius, Van Gehuchten, Sala, Athias, etc.), does not penetrate the
grey matter straight away, as some writers had supposed, but divides in the
thickness of the posterior column in such a way as to give one ascending
branch and another descending branch (A in Fig. 1). This bifurcation is in
the form of a Y and the fibres arising from it run along the dorsal column
for a considerable length to end finally within the grey substance by way of
varicose, pericellular arborizations.
   But in addition to these terminal arborizations, the sensory root fibres also
give off at right angles a considerable number of collateral twigs, either from
the main trunk or from the ascending and descending branches; thanks to
these, the sensory root fibres connect up with all the neurons of the grey
matter (a, b, c in Fig. 2 and C in Fig. 1). These collaterals can be divided into
two principal varieties: the long or reflexomotor destined to come into contact
with the motor neuron (C in Fig. 2) as our research, and above all that of
Kölliker and of von Lenhossék, has indeed demonstrated; and the short dest-
ined to come into relation with the funicular neurons (homolateral and op-
posito-lateral) which lie in the two horns of the grey matter (a and c in
Fig. 2).
   The terminal arborizations of these fibres produce around the neurons and
their dendrites very closely knit terminal plexuses, visible especially at the
level of the motor corpuscles. Our researches, carried out firstly on embryos,
and on animals a few days old, have drawn attention to terminal varicosities
in these nests; just recently Held and Auerbach whose researches have been
confirmed and completed by us, Van Gehuchten, Mahaim, Holmgren and
many others with the help of our reduced silver method, have demonstrated
that these varicosities are well developed in adult mammals, and contain a
network or a neurofibrillar ring.*

*As regards the supposed anastomoses recently brought to notice by Held, Holmgren
and Wolff between the neurofibrils of the terminal boutons and the neuronal soma,
we consider them as anatomical hypotheses based on the observation of accidental
images, and not sufficiently clear to justify such conception. This is also the opinion
of Michotte, Van Gehuchten, Mahaim and Schiefferdecker.


224                       1906 S. RAMÓN Y CAJAL

   As c in Fig. 2 shows, the nervous movement in the sensory roots is divided
into two important currents: a direct or direct reflexo-motor current which
is transmitted without an intermediary neuron from the posterior root to




                                     Fig.2


              NEURONS: STRUCTURE AND CONNEXIONS                                225
the motor neurons; and the indirect or associated reflexo-motor current which
goes to very distant motor neurons having made a detour in passing an inter-
mediary or associated nerve corpuscle on the way, that is to say, via the direct
or commissural funicular neurons, the axons of which, from our observations,
divide very often in the white matter giving an ascending and descending
branch (C in Fig. 1).
   In Fig. 3 I show the connexions of the visual fibres and the cells of the retina.
The interneuronal relationships are shown with an admirable clarity and
simplicity in this object of study. In spite of its great complication, the retina
can be considered as a nerve ganglion formed by three rows of neurons or
nerve corpuscles: the first row encloses the rods and cones with their descend-
ing prolongations forming the external granular layer (a and b in Fig. 3); the
second is made up of the bipolar cells (c and d) and the third contains the
ganglionic neurons (e); the three series of nerve corpuscles interconnect at
the level of the said molecular or plexiform layers, internal and external.
   Note that the external plexiform layer (C in Fig. 3) encloses a multiple
connexion of which the elements are: externally, the terminal spheres of the
rod fibres and the conical feet of the descending prolongations of the cones,
equipped with filamentous attachments; internally, the external processes of
the bipolar cells of which, as we have shown, there are two varieties: bipolar
cells with flattened processes going to the cones (d in Fig. 3) and robust bi-
polar cells with ascending dendritic processes going to the rods (c in Fig. 3),
and finally there are the protoplasmic branches and nerve arborizations of
 the horizontal cells of the internal granular layer.
    The internal plexiform layer has even more complicated connexions which
 can be divided into three, or even many more, stages. The essential factors
 are represented, externally by the terminal processes of the descending pro-
 longation of the bipolar cells and the terminal ramifications of the inferior
 expansions of the spongioblasts; internally by the flattened protoplasmic
 arborization of the neurons of the ganglionic layer.
    In following the axons of the neurons of the ganglionic layer the length
 of the optic nerve, we will find in the mid-brain and the intermediary brain yet
 a third connexion brought to light, primarily by our researches on the optic
 lobe of birds and the mid-brain of mammals, and then by very interesting
 observations by my brother (lateral geniculate body of mammals, optic lobe of
 birds, reptiles and fishes), and by Van Gehuchten, Kölliker, Sala, Tello, etc.
 As we know, certain axis-cylinders of the optic tract go forward, ending by
 free, very complicated, ramifications into the depths of the lateral geniculate


226                        1906 S. RAMÓN Y CAJAL




                                    Fig.3

body; others, going backward, become large ascending arborizations in the
cortex of the anterior quadrigeminal body. It is here that the visual reflexo-
motor pathway originates (g in Fig. 3).
   Finally, these observations in mammals and in children have demonstrated
to us the fourth and last connexion of the optic conductors, that is to say, of
the central optic pathway, the original neurons of which are in the lateral
geniculate body. This interesting terminal connexion, verified by the im-


                NEURONS: STRUCTURE AND CONNEXIONS                                         227
portant anatomo-pathological work of Henschen, is in the calcarine fissure
at the level of the 4th and 5th cortical zone in which are found two very
compact layers of astrocytes (g in Fig. 7).
   Let us now look at Figs. 4 and 5, which are of the neurons, and of the con-
nexions of cells and fibres in a cerebellar lamella. As we well know, a trans-
verse section of these lamellae shows three concentric layers of neurons.
   The first, or plexiform layer, is formed principally by small star-shaped
cells (or basket cells according to some authors); the second, or intermediary,
is made up of Purkinje cell bodies. The third and last is the result of granular
reunion.
   From my observations, confirmed by a large number of writers (Van Ge-




Fig. 4. Semi-schematic reproduction of the Purkinje cell connexions of the cerebellum.
Reduced silver method. A, star-shaped cell of the molecular layer; a, initial narrowed
portion of its axon; B, terminal baskets; C, recurrent collaterals; b, final fibrillae of these
collaterals, terminating in rings leaning against the large trunks of the Purkinje cells.


228                         1906 S. RAMÓNY CAJAL




                                      Fig. 5

huchten, Kölliker, Lugaro, Edinger, my brother, Falcone, Retzius, Azoulay,
Held, etc.), it appears that all these elements have two sorts of connexions:
intrinsic connexions, that is to say, established between the neurons of super-
imposed layers, and extrinsic connexions, taking place between the neurons
of the cerebellum and nerve cells belonging to other central organs.
   Let us examine firstly the intrinsic connexions and begin with those which
take place between the Purkinje corpuscles and the axons of the small star-
shaped elements of the plexiform layer.
   These axons give off several collaterals and after a variable course, describe
an arc to finish at the level of the bodies of the Purkinje neurons, with the
help of a large number of successively thickened ramifications (A in Fig. 4).
These terminal branches, in the same way as the descendant twigs of the
descending collaterals, form around the Purkinje bodies a nest or tight plexus,
which often terminates downwards in a pin-point (B in Fig. 4). The interest-


               NEURONS: STRUCTURE AND CONNEXIONS                               229
 ing connexion by contact which is established in this way by two orders of
 neurons has been confirmed by Dogiel and by us, using the methylene-blue
 method. Recently we ourselves, Bielschowski, Wolff and others have suc-
 ceeded in showing this admirably impregnated with the neurofibrillar
 methods.
    Let us see now the connexions between the grains and the Purkinje cells.
 The grains are little nervous elements with several fine dendrites ending in
 a digitiform ramification, and having an extraordinarily delicate axon (a in
 Fig. 5). This nerve prolongation ascends to the plexiform layer, and bifur-
 cating at different heights produces a very delicate so-called parallel fibre, be-
 cause it is in a position parallel to the lamellae of the cerebellum. During its
 long longitudinal path this fibre makes contact with the spiny contours of
 the dendrite branches of the Purkinje cells. As each fibril runs the whole length
 of a cerebellar lamella, it follows that a single grain cell can affect a multitude
 of Purkinje cells.
    Among these intrinsic connexions we should add those established between
 the recurrent collaterals of the Purkinje corpuscles, and the large dendritic
 branches of these last (b in Fig. 4). As we well know, the recurrent collaterals
 discovered by Golgi go to the molecular layer where, once again, they ramify
 repeatedly. For a long time we did not know the way these nerve branches
 end, and we thought up many suppositions concerning their connexions with
 the elements of the plexiform layer. Recently, in studying the cerebellum of
 dog and man, with the reduced silver nitrate method, we were lucky to
 discover that the final twigs of the said fibres, having become longitudinal,
 finish by way of a minute neurofibrillar ring on the surface of the dendritic
 stem of the Purkinje corpuscles (b in Fig. 4). This fact showed therefore, as
 we had admitted formerly, that the recurrent collaterals serve to associate in
 a dynamic ensemble the neurons of the same kind from the same area of the
 grey matter (C in Fig. 4).
    The extrinsic connexions of the cells of the cerebellar cortex are only im-
 perfectly understood. We know, as Golgi demonstrated, that the Purkinje
 cells give rise to long or motor nervous prolongations, of which the ending
 is unknown (probably it is in the olive or the roof ganglion). Inversely, we
 know how two sorts of afferent nerve fibres end in the cerebellum, the man
fibres and the climbing fibres whose originating neurons are still puzzling.
    On the other hand, the connexions established between these two types
 of conductors and the cells of the cerebellar cortex are very interesting theo-
 retically. They have contributed greatly to persuading us of the truth of the


230                          1906 S. RAMÓN Y CAJAL

neuronal doctrine. We have confirmed the connexions even more plainly
with the Ehrlich reduced silver nitrate method, than was revealed in the first
place by the Golgi method.
   You well know that the moss fibres are large medullary tubes which ramify
and end in the granular layer, in contact with the digitiform branches of the
grain cells, by means of their rosettes, or thick, varicose ramifications (A in
Fig. 5). This very curious articulation, pointed out firstly by us (1894) and
confirmed by Held, Berliner, Wolff, etc. takes place in certain anucleated
parts of the granular area, which we call cerebellar glomeruli because of their
resemblance to the olfactory glomeruli. According to our recent observations,
confirmed by Bielschowsky and Wolff, who used the former’s method, the
final outgrowths of the moss fibres form a loose neurofibrillar reticulum,
and even handle-like processes and terminal rings.
   As regards the climbing fibres, they cross the granular layer and run the
length of Purkinje cell bodies and envelop the ascending trunks and the prin-
cipal secondary branches of these neurons with a wonderful terminal arbor-
ization which is stretched out and climbing, and may be compared with that
of the motor fibres on the corpuscles of striated muscle (D in Fig. 4 and C in
Fig. 5).
   The result of what we have just shown is that the gram cells and Purkinje
neurons can receive nerve impulses from other centres, probably from the
ganglia of the protuberance, and from the ascending branch of the vestibular
nerve; while the big, star-like elements of the granular zone seem to have
no relation at all with the extrinsic fibres.
   We have not the time to review all the very convincing examples of neu-
ronal articulation in other nerve centres such as the olfactory bulb, the cerebral
cortex, the optic thalamus, the sensory and sympathetic ganglia, etc., all cen-
tres which we have once studied very carefully. We will limit ourselves here
to mentioning succinctly the existence of a special factor in the intercellular
articulations - one whose physiological role is still vigorously debated and
must be of great importance. We allude to the centrifugal fibres, shown a long
time ago by us and by Dogiel in the retina, then found again in the olfactory
bulb, the anterior quadrigeminal body, and, in especial abundance, in the
optic thalamus.
   As you can see in Fig. 6 (a) which is a schematic section of the retina of
birds, centrifugal fibres arising from nerve centres not yet known cross direct-
ly the internal plexiform layer. As soon as they arrive at the spongioblast
layer, they divide into a terminal arborization with short and varicose branch-


              NEURONS:    STRUCTURE AND CONNEXIONS                            231




                                      Fig.6

es which make contact with the soma and the descending stem of these last
elements (b). In birds these terminal branches connect in a specific way with
a particular type of neuron which we have called association spongioblasts (b).
These special corpuscles which have a true axis-cylinder like ordinary neu-
rons, receive the centrifugal nervous impulse through their bodies and their
short dendrites propagate it horizontally, firstly via the axon to groups of
very distant amacrine cells (d), and secondly via these last to the interneuronal
articulations of the internal plexiform layer. These articulations are, as we
know, made up of the descending plumes of the bipolar cells on the one
hand, and of the dendrites of the ganglionic corpuscles on the other (e).
   As an example of centrifugal fibres of central organs we reproduce, in
Fig. 7 (a and e), those which end in the sensory nucleus of the thalamus. Note
firstly that this nucleus (lateral nucleus of Kölliker, ventral nucleus of Nissl)
represents the relating station between the two encephalic sensory neurons,
i.e. the inferior neuron formed by the axon bands of Reil, or the internal lemniscus
(G in Fig. 7) and the su perior or thalamo-cortical neuron (d in Fig. 7) whose
body lies in the said nucleus while its nerve prolongation, having reached
the striate body, ends by complicated ramifications in the sensory-motor
areas of the cortex, making contact here with the pyramids from the third
cerebral layer (b in Fig. 7). Well, my research carried out in the thalamus


232                         1906 S. RAMÓN Y CAJAL

of the mouse and the rabbit persuaded me that one of the absolutely constant
factors in the articulation of the two neurons in the superior sensory pathway
is the terminal ramification of the cortico-thalamic or descending fibres,
whose origin is very probably in the sensory-motor areas of the cortex (a
and e in Fig. 7).
   What is the role of the centrifugal fibres? Are they, as Duval thinks, con-
ductors destined to produce in the sensory pathway articulations a very in-
timate contact which would be indispensable for the satisfactory propagation
of the nervous impulse? Or rather do they transport some form of energy
from the brain, the rapid accumulation of which in the sensory stations is
necessary for the passage of ascending nerve currents? Unfortunately, at this
stage of science, it is impossible to give satisfactory and categorical answers
to these questions.
   The information and preceding conclusions relate preferably to the mor-
phology of the nerve cell. In this sphere our idea, actually based on precise
and exact revelations from plasma methods (those of Golgi and of Ehrlich)
can be considered definitive. Once the research into the morphology of the
reciprocal relations of neurons was finished or at least very advanced, it was




                                    Fig.7


               NEURONS: STRUCTURE AND CONNEXIONS                             233
only natural that the neurologists should direct their attention to the very
difficult and very important subject of the constitution of nerve protoplasm.
   The work of Apathy and of Bethe has clarified this interesting subject,
opened very fortunately by Nissl with the discovery of basophilic bodies of
the protoplasm. The methods conceived by these scientists were unfortun-
ately very inconstant and difficult, and very hard work has been performed
to find other more perfect and feasible methods. This technical research has
led to the neurofibrillar procedures of Simarro, ourselves and Bielschowsky,
Donaggio, Lugaro, etc.
   All these new research techniques have advantages in certain particular
cases. Our reduced silver nitrate method, without being superior to those of
Donaggio and of Bielschowsky with respect to the differentiation of the adult
protoplasmic reticulum, does have certain advantages. It gives good results
in human beings in normal and pathological states, it can be used easily in
animals a few days old, and in nerve organs in the process of regeneration
and degeneration, and lastly it is of particular use in morphological studies
because of its efficacy on very thick and transparent sections.
   Thanks to these properties of a method which has given brilliant results in
the hands of Van Gehuchten, Michotte, G. Sala, Azoulay, Nageotte, Dogiel,
Marinesco, Perroncito, Lugaro, Tello, etc. we have been able to make the
following additions to our knowledge of the neuronal anatomy and phys-
iology.
   (a) The neurofibrillar framework of the neurons of vertebrates is not com-
posed of the mixing up and intersection of many independent conductors,
as Bethe thought, but on the contrary, of a continuous network in which
certain long and thick trusses (primary filaments), and others, short, thin and
pale (secondary filaments), are differentiated. This disposition has also recently
been observed by Donaggio, Van Gehuchten, Marinesco, Retzius, Tello, von
Lenhosstk, Dogiel and many others (a and b in Fig. 8).
   (b) The same reticular disposition can be seen in the varicosities and en-
largements of nerve branches in the motor-end plates (Ramón y Cajal, Tello),
the sensory endings (Dogiel, Tello), the outgrowths of the moss fibres (Ra-
món y Cajal), and the tip of nerve fibres in process of regeneration (Ramón
y Cajal, Perroncito, Marinesco, Nageotte, etc.). In Fig. 9 (C) look at the aspect
of the neurofibrillar reticulum in the terminal branches of a motor-end plate,
and notice that the finest twigs often contain a filamentous handle or a little
knob formed by two or three links full of neuroplasm.
   The importance of these easily controllable observations will escape no-


234                             1906 S. RAMÓN Y CAJAL




Fig. 8. Spinal cord cells of the several days old rabbit. Impregnation by the reduced
silver nitrate method. A, large funicular corpuscle; B, small corpuscle; a, primary fila-
ment; b, secondary filaments; c, d, e, neurofibrillar anastomoses at the level of the den-
                                      dritic divisions.

body; for if, as we think, in certain cases the neurofibril does not actually
end in the free end of nerve branches, the opinion of Bethe and of Apithy,
who consider these filaments as the sole conducting organs of nerve proto-
plasm, cannot be accepted.
  (c) The neurofibrillar reticulum is not a fixed, stable, conducting system,
but a framework capable of undergoing notable changes depending on the
physiological state (the influence of heat and cold in the reptiles and young
mammals, etc.) and under the influence of pathological conditions. Among
the changes due to a pathological cause, let us mention those found by Garcia
and us in rabid animals and confirmed by Marinesco and Franca (hypertrophy
of neurofibrils, coalescence of neurofibrillar bundles, reabsorption of second-


               NEURONS: STRUCTURE AND CONNEXIONS                                  235
ary trusses, etc. ; those very curious ones observed in animals which have
been cooled down (Ramón y Cajal, Tello, Marinesco, Donaggio), and, lastly,
those in the reticulum of the terminal boutons of regenerating nerve fibres,
and in the distal end of axons disconnected from their original neurons.
   We show in Figs. 10, 11 and 12 (c) several examples of these peculiar
changes in the protoplasmic framework. Note, in Fig. 10 (A) the profound
changes in the motor neurons of the lizard following hibernation. In the large
motor cells (A), the neurofibrils have bunched together into very tight bun-
dles which, by fusion, progressively become completely homogeneous cords.
Meanwhile, the transformation in the small cells is reduced to the accumula-
tion of silver-staining matter in certain neurofibrillar areas (a in Fig. 10). Ex-
actly similar phenomena are shown in Fig. 11 which shows the reticular al-
terations in the rabid dog (spinal cord), and in Fig. 12 (B and C) which shows
the very interesting changes undergone by the funicular neurons in a 15-
day-old rabbit exposed for six hours to a temperature of 10°.
   Finally, Fig. 13 shows the transformations of the neurofibrils in the central
end of a crushed nerve two days after the operation. The neurofibrils in
process of regeneration can be seen, in B, penetrating the interior of the ne-
crotic segment of the axon where they terminate in free handle-like projec-
tions; and in C a necrosed portion of the axis cylinder, invaded by branched
neurofibrils, in the process of development. In E, these branched neurofibrils,
budding from an axon irritated by the trauma, spiral around the axon which
also shows unravelling, and longitudinal vacuoles. These strange phenomena,




Fig. 9. Reticular disposition of the protoplasm of the nerve branches of a motor plate
in the adult rabbit. A, network at the level of an enlargement; B, narrowed portion;
          D, F, neurofibrillar hinges; E, neurofibrillae terminating in rings.


236                              1906 S. RAMÓN Y CAJAL




Fig. 10. A, spinal-cord motor cell of the hibernating lizard; a, another funicular cell;
B, b, the same spinal-cord cells of the lizard after several hours at a temperature of 30° C.

as well as attesting a certain autonomy of the neurofibrils, also show the great
capacity they have to change, forming structures remarkable in their variety
and in their variability.
   Our recent research with the reduced silver method has revealed some-
thing of the morphological order:
   (a) The existence in the neurons of the human sympathetic chain of a
particular type of dendrites. These are the short dendrites, characterized in ad-


               NEURONS: STRUCTURE AND CONNEXIONS                                  237

dition to their thinness by the fact that they are found only in the subcapsular
space (b in Fig. 14). It is the terminal ramifications of these which make con-
tact with the nerve nests which in man are extraordinarily complicated, as
can be seen in Fig. 15.




        Fig. II. Spinal-cord cell of a rabid dog - alteration of the reticulum.




Fig. 12. B, C, changes occurring in the funicular neurones of a rabbit, aged 15 days,
                   after 6 hours’ exposure to a temperature of 10° C.


238                            1906 S. RAMÓN Y CAJAL




Fig. 13. Crushed portion of a nerve, taken between the tongs. (Cat, killed 52 hours
after the operation.) A, B, the extremity of the living portion of the axon; C, E, ne-
crotic tubular segments with neurofibrillae in the process of neoformation; D, necro-
biotic piece of an axon, invaded by branches, springing up above the terminal bouton.


   (b) The presence in these same sympathetic ganglia in man of glomeruli
or connexion plates. That is to say, special plexuses, formed by the concurrence
of a large number of dendrites belonging to different neurons, and in which
afferent nerve fibres come to arborize and end.
   (c) The discovery, in the sensory ganglia, of cells of which the protoplasm
is partially disposed in a system of anastomotic cords (window cells) (Fig. 16).
   (d) The presence of special appendices ending in capsulated balls or but-
tons, in certain sensory, sympathetic and even cerebellar neurons (a and b
in Fig. 17). Later we will come across the interpretation of these bizarre for-


               NEURONS: STRUCTURE AND CONNEXIONS                                    239
mations, which demonstrate the capacity of the neurons to produce new
expansions, under normal and pathological conditions.
   (e) Lastly, the existence in the final bud in process of development of em-
bryonic axons, as in the case of adult axis cylinders during regeneration, of
buttons or spheres possessing a neurofibrillar reticular frame work, etc. etc.
   From the whole of these facts, the neuronal doctrine of His and of Forel,
accepted by many neurologists and physiologists, is derived as an inevitable
postulate. However, it must be said that some of the physiological inferences
drawn from observations made by the elective methods of these last twenty-
five years have been contended, and naturally cannot be considered as un-
impeachable dogmas. Present-day science, in spite of its well-founded con-
clusions, has not the right to foretell the future. Our assertion can go no
further than the revelations of contemporary methods. Perhaps, with tune,
technique will discover some coloration process capable of revealing new
and more intimate connexions between neurons thought to be in contact.
We cannot reject, a priori, the possibility that the inextricable forest of the
brain, the last branches and leaves of which we imagine ourselves to have




Fig. 14. A, B, star-shaped cells of the sympathetic chain in adult man; a, axon; b, short
          dendrites or sub-capsular appendages; d, appendage, ending in a ball.


240                           1906 S. RAMÓN Y CAJAL

discerned, does not still possess some enigmatic system of filaments binding
the neuronal whole, as creepers attach the trees of tropical forests. This is an
idea which, appearing to us with the prestige of unity and of simplicity, has
exerted and still exerts, a powerful attraction for even the most serene of spirits.
True, it would be very convenient and very economical from the point of
view of analytical effort if all the nerve centres were made up of a continuous
intermediary network between the motor nerves and the sensitive and sen-
sory nerves. Unfortunately, nature seems unaware of our intellectual need
for convenience and unity, and very often takes delight in complication and
diversity.
   Besides, we believe that we have no reason for scepticism. While awaiting
the work of the future, let us be calm and confident in the future of our work.
Let us recall that these terminal dispositions, which modern neurology has
discovered in the axons, have been established by the concordant revelations




Fig. 15. Terminal nerve apparatus of a sympathetic corpuscle in man. A, subcapsular
dendrites; B, thick dendrites forming a complicated glomerulus; a, axon; b, afferent
                                   nerve fibrillae.


              NEURONS: STRUCTURE AND CONNEXIONS                                241




Fig. 16. A, B, window cells of the plexiform ganglion of the vagus nerve in an adult
                             dog; a, axon; b, satellite cells.

of several methods. If future science reserves big surprises and wonderful
conquests for us, it must be supposed that she will complete and develop our
knowledge indefinitely, while still starting from the present facts.
   The irresistible suggestion of the reticular conception, of which I have
spoken to you (and the form of which changes every five or six years) has
led several physiologists and zoologists to object to the doctrine of the prop-
agation of nerve currents by contact or at a distance. All their allegations are
based on the findings by incomplete methods showing far less than those
which have served to build the imposing edifice of the neuronal conception.
Some of these arguments belong to the morphological order, and others to
the histogenic order.
   With regard to the morphological objections (of which we talk less now
than before, after the discovery of Donaggio’s method and ours) I will only


242                            1906 S. RAMÓN Y CAJAL

say that in spite of the pains I have taken to perceive the supposed intercel-
lular anastomoses in preparations made with diverse coloration processes
(those of Bethe, Simarro, Donaggio, Ramón y Cajal, Bielschowsky, etc.),
I have never succeeded in finding any definite ones (that is to say, showing
themselves as clearly and sharply as the free endings). I have seen none in
the pericellular nerve plexuses, nor in the boutons of Held-Auerbach, nor
between the neurofibrils belonging to different neurons. Neurologists as wise
and expert as His, Kölliker, Retzius, von Lenhossék, Duval, Van Gehuchten,
Lugaro, Schiefferdecker, Dejerine, etc. etc. are of the same opinion. If the
said intercellular unions are not the result of an illusion, they represent ac-
cidental dispositions, perhaps deformities whose value would be almost nil
in the face of the nearly infinite quantity of the perfectly observed facts of
free ending.
   As for the histogenic arguments, on which the opponents of the neuronal
doctrine have lately much insisted, considering them to be the most weighty
and decisive with which one could oppose the neuronal conception, I would
reply that my recent researches, as those of Perroncito, Marinesco, Lugaro
and Nageotte, done with a more revealing process than those used by the
anti-neuronists, proves in the most incontrovertible fashion the lack of foun-
dation for the hypothesis of the discontinuous development of nerve fibres.




Fig. 17. Cell provided with appendages terminating in boutons of growth. Man aged
             65 years. a, appendages; c, denudated capsule; f, cell capsule.


              NEURONS: STRUCTURE AND CONNEXIONS                             243
Purpura, a pupil of my illustrious colleague C. Golgi, in analysing the regen-
erative process of sectioned nerves with the silver chromate method, and very
recently Krassin, of St. Petersburg, using the Ehrlich method with the same
object in view, have arrived at the same conclusions.
  Allow me to insist a little on this point of the regeneration and normal
histogenesis of nerves, because it is a question of immediate interest to which
we have devoted two years of work. Besides, the conclusions deriving from
our observations - apart from their critical importance - reveal very curious
phenomena on the physiology of the reticulum.



            Proofs of the neurogenetic doctrine of Kupffer and His

You are aware that recently the former and nearly forgotten conjecture of
Beard and Dohm of the histogenic mechanism of the nerve cords of the
embryo has been resuscitated in the link theory (catenary theory) which
states that the nerve axons, instead of being the result of the development of
the primordial expansion of the neuroblast of His, are formed following the
fusion of a large number of ectodermal corpuscles which have emigrated
towards the periphery. These elements, bound in a chain, would be the site
of a fibrillar differentiation at first discontinuous, then continuous, ending
in the construction of a large number of axons fused ulteriorly with the med-
ullary neurons. As regards the nuclei and the rest of the non-transformed
protoplasm they would become, in the adult, the Schwann cells.
   That is the conception which, with variations and even contradictions
which we have not the time to set forth in detail, has been recently defended
by Sedgwick, Bethe, Joris, Capobianco and Fragnito, Besta, Pighione, etc.
following the observations on nerve histogenesis in the embryo, and by Büng-
ner, Ballance, Bethe, Levi, Durante, Van Gehuchten, etc. based on experi-
ments concerning nerve regeneration.
   Like many scientific errors professed in good faith by distinguished scien-
tists the link theory is the result of two conditions: one subjective, and the
other objective. The first is the regrettable but inevitable tendency of certain
impatient minds, to reject the use of elective methods, such as those of Golgi
and of Ehrlich which do not lend themselves easily to improvisation; the
second is the exclusive application of processes simple and convenient, but
without a specific action on axons, and as a consequence incapable of pre-
senting clearly the neuronal expansions and their peripheral ramifications.


244                         1906 S. RAMÓN Y CAJAL

  In order to avoid regrettable miscalculations into which so many talented
observers have fallen, we have chosen (as have Medea, Perroncito, Marinesco
and Lugaro) the reduced silver method. This has the property of staining,
with transparent colouring, the medullated fibres, as well as those without
myelin and in the process of formation.
  The results obtained demonstrate almost beyond doubt that at no moment
of evolution can the axons be taken as cellular chains, or as discontinued axon
cylinders as is supposed by the anti-neuronists: on the contrary, and agreeing
with the doctrine of His and of Kölliker, the new fibres are produced follow-
ing the budding of the axons, and are in perfect continuation with the motor
or sensitive neurons, in the embryo as well as in regenerating nerves. The
so-called peripheral neuroblasts forming a chain, represent late formations, al-
ways separated from the protoplasm of the axon cylinders; they probably
belong to the mesoderm. It is perhaps as the result of an attraction exerted
by the axons emigrating towards the periphery that these elements at first
indifferent, approach the fibres and become the Schwann cells.
   The proofs of this doctrine on the histogenesis of nerves are many, in the
history of neurogenesis as well as in that of nerves regenerating after section.
Let us mention a few here.



           Proofs derived from the regenerative mechanism of nerves


1. When the sciatic nerve of a mammal (rabbit, dog or cat, aged several
weeks) is cut, and the animal is killed after three days, it can be verified, in
preparations made by our process, that a very active phenomenon of budding
takes place in a large number of nerve fibres of the central end. In following
the fibres towards their origin it can be seen that each among them presents
two continuous and well-differentiated portions (Fig. 18): the old segment,
completely normal and easily recognizable by its myelin sheath (F), and the
thinner and paler, newly formed segment without myelin (B). This last por-
tion of the axon, which resembles the fibres of Remak, penetrates the thick-
ness of the scar, or the middle of the inflammatory exudate, divides at an
acute angle very often and its branches (or the trunk in non-divided axons)
finish by means of a large excrescence often in the form of a button (C in
Fig. 18). This terminal ball sometimes very large and irregular, appears bare
at first, but in the days following (from the fourth to the sixth) it becomes
surrounded with a conjunctival capsule interspersed with nuclei. Several


               NEURONS: STRUCTURE AND CONNEXIONS                                    245
branches of the bifurcation, situated in the neighbourhood of the scar tissue,
give off arched nervous filaments which move into the interior of the central
end in a retrograde direction (e in Fig. 18).
  We observed these budding phenomena of the central end very well from
the fifth day of the operation. But Perroncito, using the reduced silver meth-




Fig. 18. Portion of the central end of the scar of a cut sciatic nerve, of a week-old cat
killed three days after the operation. A, B, non-medullated portion of nerve tubes in
the process of development; F, old or medullated portion of these tubes; C, develop-
ment-bouton; D, small terminal bouton; G, fibre emitting retrograde branches; a, b,
boutons working through the scar; c, free neurofibril ending in a ring; e, retrograde
   bouton; d, bouton, from which emerge fine appendages ending in little boutons.


246                             1906 S. RAMÓN Y CAJAL




Fig. 19. Central end of the sciatic nerve of a cat killed 52 hours after the operation.
A, ravelling-out and vacuolization of the axon; B, C, apparatus of Perroncito; D, fine
medullary fibre; a, b, terminal masses; f, neoformed fibrils; c, fibres terminating in
                                         rings.

od, had the good fortune to demonstrate that this regeneration process begins
very early, appearing from the beginning of the second day. In our prepara-
tions, however, the formation of the buttons and the penetration of these
in the intercalary conjunctive tissue seemed to begin only at the end of the
second day, or the beginning of the third. We also stated the reality of a very
curious phenomenon of ravelling out, and of dispersion of the axon neuro-
fibrils. This phenomenon leads on to the early creation of a fasciculus of young
nerve fibres, of which some, ramifying and developing very actively, give
rise to a system of spiral filaments which surround the rectilinear neurofibril-
lar and axial fascicula without leaving the space limited by the Schwann


               NEURONS: STRUCTURE AND CONNEXIONS                                     247
sheath. These odd fibrillar apparatuses, which we call the organs of Perroncito
are often missing in young animals (B and C in Fig. 19). However, in studying
the regenerative phenomenon in the adult cat and dog, one can often see
them very abundantly, particularly in the large axons which have undergone
bruising. They can never be seen in the fibres of Remak or in the thin medul-
lary tubes. This is why we are inclined to consider the apparatuses of Perronci-
to as a pathological neoformation, which would sometimes lead to the forma-
tion of nerve fibres going to the scar, but would more frequently lead to the




Fig. 20. Hilus of the peripheral end of a nerve cut and prepared 72 hours after the
operation. (Cat several weeks old.) a, b, large fibres working through the scar, and
coming from the central end; d, e, fibres divided at an acute angle; f; developing-boutons
lying between the bands of Büngner; e, fibre of which the two branches are leading
                                towards different bands.


248                         1906 S. RAMÓN Y CAJAL

construction of clusters and barren spiral dispositions (spiral apparatuses of the
central end, already seen by the ancient authors such as Ranvier, Vanlair,
Stroebe, etc.).
   It is easy to understand that the phenomenon of Perroncito as well as the
early budding of the nervous fibres of the central end, and above all the
presence of balls of development in the extremities of axons penetrating the
scar, are facts of great value in favour of the neurogenetic doctrine of His,
because all these dispositions are there before the Schwann cell multiplication
phase and, as a consequence, earlier than the differentiation process of the
bands of Büngner.
2. When, repeating the experiment of Vulpian, Brown-Séquard, Bethe and
Van Gehuchten, after cutting the nerve, obstacles are put between the two
fragments in order to stop immediate reunion, a very advanced regenera-
tion of the peripheral segment can often (but not always) be observed three
or four months after the operation. In these circumstances it follows now
and then that there must be a continuous cord, not visible macroscopically,
uniting the two ends of the interrupted nerve. This then is the big histological
argument of the catenary school which would become irrefutable if the anti-
neuronists had submitted the intermediary scar to a thorough micrographic
analysis. Unfortunately this exploration has only been done very incom-
pletely by methods incapable of staining unmyelinated nerve fibres. Now,
this intercalary tissue, supposed to be void of newly formed fibres, contains a
 considerable number of them, as Marinesco and I have demonstrated, yet the
 nerve fibres hardly form a cord, but a very free plexus scattered through the
 muscular and aponeurotic interstices, and uniting the central end with the
 peripheral end across all the obstacles, and often after very large detours.
 3. The nerve fibres, having arrived at their destination, that is to say at the
 approaches of the peripheral segment, divide over and over again producing
 very complicated nerve bouquets, already pointed out by the ancient ana-
 tomo-pathologists, and just recently by Purpura, Perroncito, Marinesco and
 Krassin. These secondary branches board the above segment, going there
 sometimes via the interior of the bands of Büngner, sometimes through their
 interstices, terminating at different levels by means of a developing bouton.
 Sometimes several fibres can be seen dividing again in the depths of the distal
 end, diverging at an acute angle, and orientating themselves in a centrifugal
 direction (Fig. 20).
    The existence of all these ramifications from fibres issuing from the scar,
 and above all the presence at the tip of each branch of a growing-ball con-


               NEURONS: STRUCTURE AND CONNEXIONS                             249
stantly orientated towards the periphery (f in Fig. 20) are phenomena irre-
concilable with the catenary hypothesis. Let us add to this that the more
delicate fibres located in the bands of Büngner are never shown to be dis-
continuous, but in evident continuation with those coming from the scar;
consequently they are independent of the Schwann cells and the adipose mas-
ses of the former nerve tubes.
4. The phenomenon of the balls (Fig. 17). Apart from the regenerative pro-
cess of which we have just spoken, there are also processes of spontaneous
nervous neoformation in the nerve centres of adult man which are very suit-
able for the analysis of the regenerative mechanism. As we have shown above,
our recent researches into the structure of the nerve ganglia in the bigger
mammals has shown the constant presence of a certain number of sensory
and sympathetic corpuscles, whose body as well as the principal prolonga-
tion, give off nerve fibres which end at variable distances, sometimes under
the capsule, sometimes in the very thickness of the white substance of the
ganglion, by means of a developing-bouton surrounded by a nucleated en-
velope.
   Before undertaking our research on nerve regeneration we thought that
these curious ball-like appendages constituted stable arrangements belonging
to some special category of sensory corpuscles; but now that we have met
similar facts in the sympathetic system of old animals, in the cerebellum and
ganglia of animals stricken with rabies and other infectious diseases, lastly in
nerves undergoing regeneration; after Nageotte also, by his elegant studies
on ganglia of tabetics, has revealed, with the reduced silver nitrate method,
the existence of a large number of ball-shaped sensory neurons and neo-
formed nerve fibres, we do not doubt that the appendages terminated by
encapsulated spheres represent quite simply the result of a very interesting
process of nerve production. Thus it would be a physiological phenomenon
within certain limits, which is exaggerated following toxic influences or other
conditions.
    We will not discuss here the interpretations which the above discovery
suggests; we will say nothing, for example, of the ingenious hypothesis of
collateral regeneration conceived by Nageotte; neither will we stop at present
to determine whether the ball cells, when they produce nerve branches, obey
 an irritative process without finality or congruity, or if rather they attempt to
 re-establish conducting pathways, degenerated or seriously impaired follow-
 ing functional fatigue or toxic action. We will restrict ourselves to main-
 taining here that the ball corpuscles give a striking demonstration of the


250                           1906 S. RAMÓN Y CAJAL

regenerative autonomy of adult neurons, and their capacity to produce new
fibres by simple budding, and without the help of the Schwann cells.



                   Proofs derived from embryonic neurogenesis

The following data, which fully confirm the neurogenetic conception of
Kupffer, His and Kölliker, are also based on the revelations of the reduced
silver nitrate methods which stain the nerve fibres of the chick embryo in the
sixtieth hour of incubation quite constantly (fixation by alcohol). Here are
several very significant facts.
1. The neuroblasts of His in the embryonic medulla of the chick (Fig. 21)
take on, firstly at the beginning of the third day, the classical pear-shaped
form, which eventually becomes fusiform with a large expansion growing




Fig. 21. Section of the spinal cord of the chick embryo at 3rd day of incubation. Re-
duced silver method. A, anterior root; B, sensory ganglion and posterior root; a, a, motor
   neuroblasts; b, c, commisural ends in axon neuroblasts whose a developing cone.


                NEURONS: STRUCTURE AND CONNEXIONS                                 251




                                                            b



Fig. 22. Neuroblasts of the chick embryo at the 60th hour of incubation. A, developing-
cone stained by the reduced silver nitrate method; B, cone impregnated by the Golgi
                     method; a, primordial dendritic expansion.
out towards the medullary periphery, and a little soma formed almost ex-
clusively by the nucleus. The neurofibrils, the only constituent factors of the
cell attracting the silver deposit, begin in the cone of origin of the primordial
prolongation, and extend under the fascicular form as far as the developing
cone, in the interior of which they finish in a point like a paint brush. Thus
these observations confirm the cone of development which was demonstrated
a long time ago, using the silver chromate method by us, von Lenhossék and
Retzius, but the comparison of sections stained by the two impregnation
processes proves that this terminal mass contains, other than the said neuro-
fibrillar brush point, an unstained plasma substance (Fig. 22) disposed in
sheets and in diverging spines.* It is useless to point out that neuronal individ-
uality seems certain in these preparations. In them one cannot discover a single
trace of these cellular chains, or of these bizarre anastomosed neuroblastic
columns, of which Sedgwick, Bethe, Fragnito, Joris, Besta, etc. speak.
2. It is also very easy to verify that, in their more embryonic phases (from
the second day of incubation) the motor and sensory nerves are not made up
of series of neuroblasts, as maintain Beard, Dohm, Balfour, Fragnito, Levi,
etc. but of very thin continued prolongations issuing from the neurons; which
go, sometimes independent, sometimes united to fascicles, across the inter-
cellular spaces of the mesoderm. As for the marginal, or covering, cells (the
* We have not observed either the terminal cell recently indicated by H. Held who
has made himself the defender of Hensen’s old neurogenetic hypothesis. In our prep-
arations the developing cone always appears extra-cellular.


252                           1906 S. RAMÓN Y CAJAL

lemmoblasts of Lenhossék) these will appear later (the fourth day) seated
around the nervous fasciculae with which they have only contiguous rela-
tionships.
3. On examining the final branches of the motor and sensory roots in the
depths of the mesodermal tissue, it can often be seen that each fibre ends
freely by means of a developing-bouton, exactly identical to those seen in
degenerating nerve tubes (a in Fig. 23). It is also very easy to see dichotomous
divisions of young fibres, and even complicated ramifications (b). Let us note
that in these very thin peripheral branches, and in consequence very recent
ones, one can never find traces of cellular chains, or even of marginal or
terminal corpuscles.
4. The motor nerve cords examined in the neighbourhood of centres (fa-
cial, hypoglossal, etc.) are completely devoid of interior nuclei, even in very
advanced embryos (the rabbit embryo, 2.5 cm long). We will dwell no more
on this particular fact, verified by Kölliker, His, Gurwitsch, von Lenhossék,




Fig. 23. Sensory axons in the process of development spreading across the embryonic
conjunctive tissue (embryo of 3½ days); a, terminal bouton; b, bifurcation of a fibre;
                              c, branch ending in a point.


              NEURONS: STRUCTURE AND CONNEXIONS                            253
Harrison, etc. and never sufficiently explained by partisans of the catenary
theory.
5. As we well know, all the central pathways are formed without the help
of Schwann cells, and by virtue of a process of development continued from
the axon of the association neurons. To this fact, brought out not only by
the reduced silver nitrate method, but also by ordinary coloration methods,
we will add that, in certain pathways, such as those of the cerebellum, a large
number of developing young nerve fibres, provided with many terminal
boutons, are often found, even in very much developed foetuses (dog, cat,
rabbit).
   To sum up: from the entirety of the observations which we have just
shown, and from many others about which we have not the time to talk,
the doctrine of neurogenesis of His is clearly revealed as an inevitable postu-
late. We mourn this scientist who, in the last years of a life so well filled,
suffered the injustice of seeing a phalanx of young experimenters treat his
most elegant and original discoveries as errors.
   I finish by greeting most warmly and cordially this learned and sympa-
thetic assembly, which I ought also to thank very much for their attention
and kindness to me, during such a long and tedious lecture.
