--                                             S EVERO        O CHOA


                   Enzymatic synthesis of ribonucleic acid

                                     Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1959




     I am deeply conscious of the great distinction with which I have been hon-
     ored and deem it a special privilege to review the recent studies of the bio-
     synthesis of ribonucleic acid on this occasion.
        The nucleic acids have considerable biological importance because of their
     role in cell growth and in the transmission of hereditary characters. As first
     suggested by the pioneer work of Caspersson and Brachet the former func-
     tion is performed by ribonucleic acid (RNA) through its participation in
     the biosynthesis of proteins. The second is carried out by deoxyribonucleic
     a c i d (D N A ) , t h e m a i n c o m p o n e n t o f t h e n u c l e a r c h r o m o s o m e s . I t i s o f i n -
     terest, however, that in certain viruses such as tobacco mosaic, influenza, and
     poliomyelitis virus, which consist of RNA and protein, RNA is the carrier
     of genetic information.
       Most of the cell’s RNA is present in the cytoplasm. There are two kinds
     of cytoplasmic RNA. One, of relatively small molecular size, is found in
     the cytoplasmic fluid and is, therefore, referred to as soluble RNA; the other,
     of much higher molecular weight, is a component of the microsomal ribo-
     nucleo-protein particles. Both play an essential role in protein synthesis.
     There is, in addition, a small amount of RNA in the cell nucleus, most of
     it located in the nucleolus. There are indications that most, if not all, of
     the cytoplasmic RNA is synthesized in the nucleus and subsequently trans-
     ported to the cytoplasm. In transmitting genetic information, nuclear DNA
     is supposed to determine the nature of the nuclear RNA which, on en-
     tering the cytoplasm, determines in turn the nature of the proteins synthe-
     sized.
        Although notable advances had been made in our knowledge of the way
     in which the nucleotides, the nucleic acid building stones, are synthesized,
     little was known until recently of the mechanism of synthesis of the giant
     molecules of the nucleic acids themselves. We owe our present information
     to the discovery of enzymes capable of catalyzing the synthesis of RNA and
     DNA in the test tube from simple, naturally occurring precursors. These
     precursors are the nucleoside di- and triphosphates, the nucleotide moieties


646                                    1 9 5 9   L O C H O A


of which undergo polymerization with release of orthophosphate in the first
case or of pyrophosphate in the second.




In 1955 we isolated a bacterial enzyme capable of catalyzing the synthesis of
high molecular weight polyribonucleotides from nucleoside diphosphates
                                         1,2
with release of orthophosphate . T h e r e a c t i o n , w h i c h r e q u i r e s m a g n e s i u m
ions and is reversible, can be formulated by the equation




where R stands for ribose, P - P for pyrophosphate, P for orthophosphate,
and X for one or more bases including, among others, adenine, hypoxan-
thine, guanine, uracil, or cytosine. In the reverse direction the enzyme brings
about a cleavage of polyribonucleotides by phosphate, i.e. a phosphorolysis,
to yield ribonucleoside diphosphates. The reaction is similar to the reversible
synthesis and cleavage of polysaccharides, catalyzed by phosphorylase; for
this reason the new enzyme was named polynucleotide phosphorylase. Be-
cause of its reversibility, the reaction leads to an incorporation or "exchange"
of orthophosphate into the terminal phosphate group of nucleoside diphos-
phates. It was through this exchange that polynucleotide phosphorylase was
discovered by the use of radioactive phosphate. In our early work with
Grunberg-Manago, polynucleotide phosphorylase was partially purified, by
use of the radiophosphate exchange reaction, from the microorganism A z o -
tobacter vinelandii. The enzyme has the unique feature of catalyzing not only
the synthesis of RNA from mixtures of the four naturally occurring ribo-
nucleoside diphosphates, but also that of non-naturally occurring polyribo-
nucleotides containing only one, two, or three different kinds of nucleotides
in their chains. The nature of the product depends on the kind and variety
                                                                                       3,4
of the nucleoside diphosphate substrates utilized for the synthesis . Table 1
lists the main types of polyribonucleotides which have been prepared with
polynucleotide phosphorylase. The preparation of polyribothymidylic acid
                                                                                             5
from synthetic ribothymidine diphosphate has recently been reported .
                                                                                                 6-8
   Structure of polynucleotides - In joint experiments with L. A. Heppe1 i t
has been established that the synthetic polyribonucleotides conform in all
respects to the structural pattern of natural RNA. Thus, it was found by
degradation with alkali, or such enzymes as snake venom and spleen phos-


         E N Z Y M A T I C   S Y N T H E S I S   O F   R I B O N U C L E I C   A C I D   647

phodiesterase or pancreatic ribonuclease, that they consist of linear chains in
which the component nucleoside units are linked to one another through
3’,5’-phosphodiester bridges. The structural identity with natural RNA can
briefly be illustrated by the effect of pancreatic ribonuclease on the synthetic
polymer poly AU. From what is known of the action of ribonuclease on
RNA, poly AU would be degraded at the points indicated by the arrows in
Fig. 1. Uridylic acid (uridine 3’-monophosphate) would be released as the




Fig. 1. Scheme of cleavage of poly AU by pancreatic ribonuclease. The vertical lines
represent the ribose residues; A and U represent the bases adenine and uracil, respec-
                                                                    3
                 tively. The cleavage points are indicated by arrows .




only mononucleotide, along with a series of small oligonucleotides, each
consisting of one uridylic acid residue and one or more adenylic acid res-
idues. Fig. 2 is an ultraviolet print of a chromatogram illustrating the separa-
tion of mono-, di,- tri-, tetra-, and pentanucleotides each with decreasing R f
values from a ribonuclease digest of poly AU. The individual spots were
eluted and the respective oligonucleotides identified following hydrolysis
with alkali. Digestion of synthetic RNA with ribonuclease yields, along with
uridylic and cytidylic acids, mixtures of oligonucleotides which, as far as


                                   1959   S.OCHOA




Fig. 2. Products of hydrolysis of poly AU by ribonuclease (L. A. Heppel). Origin is
                                                                                  3
at top of chromatogram. Spot at bottom center is a marker of uridine 3’-phosphate .


they have been identified, are identical to those obtained from natural RNA
under the same conditions.
   The question whether a given nucleotide species is linked to the various
other nucleotides in the polynucleotide chains, as is the case with natural
RNA, can be easily answered through degradation of synthetic RNA labeled
                               9
with radioactive p h o s p h a t e . Fig. 3 presents the structure of a polynucleotide
( p o l y A * G U C ) , p r e p a r e d from a mixture of adenosine diphosphate labeled
       32                                                  32
with        P in the first phosphate group (adenosine- P-P) and non-labeled
guanosine-, uridine-, and cytidine diphosphates. If the labeled adenylic acid
is randomly distributed as shown, hydrolysis of such a polymer with snake
venom phosphodiesterase (Fig. 3A) will yield nucleoside 5’-monophos-
phates of which only adenosine 5’-monophosphate will be labeled. Hydrol-
ysis with spleen phosphodiesterase, on the other hand (Fig. 3B) will release


         E N Z Y M A T I C    S Y N T H E S I S   O F   R I B O N U C L E I C   A C I D   649




                                     32
Fig. 3. Scheme of hydrolysis of P-labeled RNA (poly A*GUC) by snake venom
( A ) or spleen (B) phosphodiesterase. The bonds hydrolyzed are indicated by dashed
                             32
lines. The asterisk denotes P labeling. Ad, Gu, Ur and Cy represent the bases adenine,
                                                                 9
                       guanine, uracil and cytosine, respectively .


nucleoside 3’-monophosphates all of which will be labeled. That such is in-
deed the case is shown in Fig. 4. The separation of the hydrolysis products in
this experiment was effected by ion-exchange chromatography.
   Although large variations in the relative proportions of the different nu-
cleoside diphosphate substrates has a rather marked influence on the nucleo-
tide composition of the resulting polymer, when synthetic RNA is prepared


                          1 9 5 9 S . O C H O A
650




Fig. 4. Hydrolysis of poly A*GUC with snake venom (top) or spleen (bottom) phos-
phodiesterase with separation of mononucleotides by ion-exchange chromatography.
Plot of nucleotide concentration (solid lines -o-o-o-) and radioactivity (dashed lines
                                                               12
                    -o-o-o-) against effluent fraction number .


from equimolar mixtures of adenosine, guanosine, uridine, and cytidine
 diphosphate, the nucleotide composition of the product is very similar to
 that of natural A z o t o b a c t e r RNA. This is shown in Table 2 which gives the


             E N Z Y M A T I C        S Y N T H E S I S      O F      R I B O N U C L E I C        A C I D        651

base ratios of Azotobacter RNA and of two different samples of the synthetic
product. It is noteworthy that the base ratios differ widely from unity in
spite of the fact that equimolar concentrations of the nucleoside diphosphate
precursors were used.
   The synthetic polyribonucleotides also resemble natural RNA in size.
Their molecular weight varies between about 30,000 and one to two mil-
lions. The sedimentation constant of samples of synthetic RNA was similar
to that of RNA isolated from whole Azotobacter cells. Polynucleotides con-
taining only one kind of nucleotide unit, such as polyadenylic or polycyti-
dylic acid, are often of very large size and confer high viscosity to their
solutions. It is possible to follow the course of synthesis visually by the
marked increase in viscosity that takes place on incubation of nucleoside di-
phosphates with a few micrograms of enzyme. Natural RNA- has a non-
s p e c i f i c b i o l o g i c a l activity w h i c h i s a l s o e x h i b i t e d b y s y n t h e t i c R N A . T h e
latter is as effective as the former in stimulating the formation of streptolysin S
                                                                 10
(a lecithinase) by hemolytic streptococci .
   Reaction mechanism - To study the mechanism of action of polynucleotide
phosphorylase it was essential to obtain highly purified preparations of the
e n z y m e . T h e l a s t s t e p ( F i g . 5 ) was chromatography on a hydroxyl apatite
                                                                                              11
column, a method developed by Tiselius and collaborators . Only through
chromatography was it possible to separate the enzyme from a contam-
inating yellow protein of unknown nature which, as seen in the figure, is
eluted at higher buffer concentrations than is phosphorylase. The purifica-
tion of the enzyme after chromatography is some six hundred fold over the
initial extract of A z o t o b a c t e r c e l l s . T h e h i g h l y p u r i f i e d e n z y m e c o n t a i n s a
                                               12
firmly bound oligonucleotide                        which cannot be removed by such methods
as treatment with charcoal or ribonuclease. Since it has so far not been pos-
sible to remove the oligonucleotide without destroying the enzyme protein
it remains undecided whether this compound, which represents about 3.5
per cent of the enzyme, is a prosthetic group or a contaminant. The oligo-
nucleotide consists of about twelve nucleotide residues of adenylic, guanylic,
uridylic and cytidylic acid in roughly the same molar ratios as in Azotobacter
RNA. It can be isolated after denaturation of the protein with perchloric
acid or phenol.
   Since the Aztobacter enzyme can synthesize RNA as well as polynucleo-
tides with only one nucleotide species, it is important to decide whether one
is dealing with a mixture of enzymes, each reacting with a different nucleo-
side diphosphate, or with a single enzyme. Although this question cannot be


652                                   1 9 5 9   S . O C H O A


answered unequivocally, if the activity toward each of several nucleoside di-
phosphates increases to the same extent on purification, it is very likely that
a single enzyme is involved. That this is so is shown in Table 3 in which the




                           32
* Results, micromoles of        P-exchange per mg of enzyme protein, 15 minutes at 30º.


activity toward each of five nucleoside diphosphates, as assayed by the radio-
active phosphate exchange method, is seen to increase approximately to the
same extent between two advanced purification steps. The same was true
for earlier stages of purification.
  With partially purified preparations of polynucleotide phosphorylase po-




Fig. 5. Chromatography of Azotobacter poiynucleotide phosphorylase on hydroxyl
                   apatite (S. Ochoa and S. Mii, unpublished).


           E N Z Y M A T I C    S Y N T H E S I S    O F      R I B O N U C L E I C   A C I D     653

lynucleotide synthesis starts immediately after adding the enzyme to an
otherwise complete system. This is not the case, however, with highly pur-
ified preparations. In this case, there is mostly a more or less pronounced lag
period although eventually the reaction starts and gradually increases in rate.
Equilibrium is not reached even after many hours of incubation. The reac-
tion rate is markedly stimulated by addition of small amounts of oligo- or
polynucleotides which, as is the case with glycogen in polysaccharide syn-
t h e s i s f r o m g l u c o s e - r - p h o s p h a t e b y ( p o l ysaccharide) phosphorylase, serve
as primers of the reaction. The priming effect of oligoribonucleotides was
                                                       1 3
discovered by Heppel and collaborators                       , the priming by polynucleotides
                                           1 4
was disclosed in our laboratory . T h e m a i n o l i g o n u c l e o t i d e p r i m e r s u s e d
have been di-, tri-, or tetraadenylic acids isolated as reaction products of
                                                                                         15
hydrolysis of polyadenylic acid by a nuclease from liver nuclei ;
   The priming by oligonucleotides is not specific. The oligoadenylic acids
can prime the synthesis of polyadenylic and polyuridylic acid as well as that
of RNA or any of the other polynucleotides. Priming by polynucleotides,
on the other hand, shows a certain degree of specificity. Thus, polyadenylic
acid primes only its own synthesis and the same is true of polyuridylic acid.
On the other hand RNA, whether natural or synthetic, primes the synthesis
of RNA as well as that of polyadenylic acid or polyuridylic acid. Very cu-
rious and completely unexplained is the effect of polycytidylic acid which
primes the synthesis of all the polynucleotides os far tested (Table 4). Fig. 6
shows the priming of RNA synthesis with highly purified polynucleotide
phosphorylase by triadenylic acid (TAA), liver RNA, and polycytidylic


 654                                      1 9 5 9   S . O C H O A




         Fig. 6. Priming of RNA synthesis (S. Ochoa and Mii, unpublished).
                                                                   ++
 Diphosphates (A+G+U+C), 5     moles each; Mg , 2.0    moles; enzyme,                                  g;
                 TRIS, pH 8.1,       moles; volume, 1.0 ml.


acid (poly C). The effect of different p o l y n u c l e o t i d e s o n t h e s y n t h e t i c r e a c -
 tion is illustrated in Table 4. It is to be noted that polyadenylic acid is not
 only without effect but actually inhibits the slow synthesis of polyuridylic acid
which occurs in the absence of added primer; the converse is also true. It
 should further be noted that the synthesis of polycytidylic acid is primed
 only by polycytidylic acid itself.
    The mechanism of priming by polynucleotides and the cause and signif-
icance of the specificity just described are as yet unexplained. The possibility
that polyribonucleotides might function as templates for their own replica-
 tion has not been substantiated experimentally. On the other hand, the mode
 of action of the oligonucleotide primers has been elucidated in elegant exper-
                                                        13,16
iments by Heppel and his collaborators                          . They proved that the oligonu-
 cleotides serve as nuclei for growth of the polynucleotide chains by successive
 addition of mononucleotide units. It may be recalled that polysaccharide
 phosphorylase acts in a similar way by catalyzing the successive addition of
 glucosyl residues to the terminal units of a polysaccharide primer. When
 the synthesis of polyuridylic acid is primed by di- or triadenylic acid, the
 new polynucleotide chains should consist of a number of uridylic acid res-
 idues preceded by two or three adenylic acid residues. This is shown schemat-


             E N Z Y M A T I C   S Y N T H E S I S      O F   R I B O N U C L E I C   A C I D   655

--




     Fig. 7. Mechanism of priming by oligonucleotides (From data of M. F. Singer, L. A.
                                                          13
                                Heppel, and R. J. Hilmoe ).


     ically in the upper and middle portions of Fig. 7. That such is in fact the case
     was proved following ribonuclease digestion of polyuridylic acid synthesized
                                                                  13,16
     in the presence of diadenylic acid as primer                         . As shown in the middle
     portion of Fig. 7, ribonuclease would release a trinucleotide (pApApUp)
     from the origin, one molecule of uridine from the end, and a number of
     uridine 3’-monophosphate residues from the remainder of the chain. The
     trinucleotide was isolated by chromatography and digested with potassium
     hydroxide. As shown in the lower section of Fig. 7, this should yield equi-
     molar amounts of adenosine 5’,3’-diphosphate, adenosine 3’-monophosphate
     and uridine 3’-monophosphate. The figure also shows that the amounts
 .   actually recovered were in good agreement with the theory.
       It appears justified to conclude that polynucleotide phosphorylase may be
     unable to start the synthesis of a polynucleotide chain from nucleoside di-
     phosphates as the only reactants and that the presence of an oligonucleotide
     to serve as nucleus for growth of new polynucleotide chains is probably in-
     dispensable. If the enzyme could be obtained completely free of oligonu-
     cleotide primer material, it might prove to be completely inactive in the
     absence of added oligonucleotides.
       Biological significance - Polynucleotide phosphorylase is widely distributed
     in bacteria. The enzyme has been partially purified from microorganisms
                                                       and polyribonucleotides have been syn-
                                               17-19
     other than Azotobacter      vinelaandii
     thesized with these enzyme preparations. Indications have also been obtained
                                                                     17
     for the presence of the enzyme in green leaves . On the other hand, it has
     been difficult to detect the enzyme in animal tissues. Recently, however,


656                            1959 S.OCHOA

Hilmoe and Heppel have reported the presence of polynucleotide phos-
                     20



phorylase in preparations from mammalian liver nuclei.
   The occurrence of polynucleotide phosphorylase in nature appears to be
widespread enough to warrant the assumption that this enzyme may be
generally involved in the biosynthesis of RNA. This possibility appears to
be strengthened by recent studies with ribonucleoside diphosphates con-
taining different analogues of the naturally occurring bases. Thus j-bro-
mouridine diphosphate which contains 5-bromouracil, an analogue of uracil
or thymine which in experiments with intact bacterial cells is incorporated
into DNA but not into RNA, is not a substrate of polynucleotide phos-
phorylase, while thiouridine diphosphate containing the uracil analogue
thiouracil, which in similar experiments is incorporated into RNA but not
into DNA, is a substrate for phosphorylase. In line with these observations
is the fact that azauridine diphosphate containing the uracil analogue aza-
uracil which is not incorporated in vivo into RNA, does not react with poly-
nucleotide phosphorylase2 1. However, in spite of the fact that polynucleotide
phosphorylase can bring about the synthesis of an RNA of the same nucleo-
tide composition and molecular weight as that isolated from Azotobacter, and
despite the intriguing specificity of priming by polyribonucleotides, there is
so far no evidence that the enzyme is able to replicate the primer molecules
as is the case with Kornberg’s DNA polymerase. Since there must be mech-
anisms in the cell capable of synthesizing individual ribonucleic acid mole-
cules with a determined nucleotide sequence, it is likely that enzymes capable
of performing this function are still to be discovered.
   Enzymes catalyzing the addition of a few nucleotide units to a preexisting
RNA chain have recently been described from various laboratories22-24.
These enzymes catalyze the transfer of cytidylic and adenylic acid residues
from the corresponding nucleoside triphosphates to the end of polynucleo-
tide chains with release of pyrophosphate. There are no indications that they
can bring about a net synthesis of RNA. Other investigators 25,26 have de-
scribed the incorporation of ribonucleotides in the interior of RNA chains
by particulate cell fractions from animal tissues. In a recent report26 a frac-
tion from rat liver nuclei brought about this incorporation optimally from
a mixture of all four ribonucleoside triphosphates of adenosine, guanosine,
uridine and cytidine, and the reaction was markedly decreased after treat-
ment with ribonuclease suggesting requirement for an RNA primer. These
experiments suggest that an enzyme similar to Kornberg’s DNA polymerase
might be involved.


        ENZYMATIC SYNTHESIS OF RIBONUCLEIC ACID                                 657




     Fig. 8. Electrophoresis and sedimentation patterns of poly A, poly U and
                                   poly A + U27.




Physical-chemical studies on a variety of synthetic polyribonudeotides have
thrown much light on their macromolecular structure and may greatly fur-
ther our understanding of the biological properties of RNA and DNA.
Warner, in our laboratory, found that polyadenylic and polyuridylic acids
interact in solution to form a stable complex 27. At suitable pH values this
complex migrates on electrophoresis with a sharp single boundary of mobil-
ity intermediate between that of poly A and poly U. On ultracentrifugation,
it has a higher sedimentation constant than that of the parent polynucleotides
(Fig. 8). Warner further observed that formation of the complex is accom-
panied by a marked decrease of the absorption of ultraviolet light (Fig. 9).
Formation of the complex can in fact be observed visually through the
marked increase in viscosity that takes place on mixing solutions of poly A
and poly U.
                                                          28
   X-ray diffraction studies of Rich and collaborators showed that fibers
made from the poly A + U complex give rise to a crystalline pattern not
unlike that of DNA29, indicating that this complex has a double-stranded
helical structure. Further studies30 demonstrated that the strands are held to-
gether by hydrogen bonds between the complementary pairs of bases ade-
nine and uracil. These observations provided the first experimental dem-


658                              1959 S.OCHOA




Fig. 9. Absorption spectrum of an equimolar mixture of poly A and poly U. The
upper curve refers to the mononucleotides obtained by alkaline hydrolysis of the mix-
ture. The middle curve is that calculated for the separately measured spectra of the
individual polymers. The lower curve is the measured curve for the mixture of pol-
                                        ymers 27.

onstration that polynucleotides can interact to form double-stranded helical
structures similar to that proposed by Watson and Crick for DNA and,
moreover, that the same configuration may be assumed by RNA.
   The decrease of ultraviolet light absorption accompanying polynucleotide
complex formation has facilitated an extensive study of interactions between
different polynucleotides by Rich and collaborators31-33. These investigators
made the further important observation that triple-stranded helical polyribo-
nucleotide structures can also be formed. As illustrated in Fig. 10, a complex
consisting of one poly A and two poly U molecules is formed in the presence
of Mg++. The figure shows the optical density at 259 mu on adding in-
creasing amounts of a solution of poly U to one of poly A. In the absence of
magnesium the absorbancy goes through a minimum when equimolecular
amounts of the two polynucleotides are present; in the presence of magne-
sium, minimum absorbancy is reached when the solution contains 2 moles
of poly U per mole of poly A. Fig. 11 illustrates the type of hydrogen bond-
ing postulated by Rich for the poly A + U and the poly A + U + U


         ENZYMATIC         SYNTHESIS OF R I B O N U C L E I C A C I D          659




Fig. 10. Optical density (x 103) of various mixtures of poly A and poly U (From G.
      Felsenfeld, D. R. Davies, and A. Rich, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 79 (1957) 2023.


complexes. A double-stranded helical complex between poly A and poly-
ribo-thymidylic acid has more recently been obtained by Rich and collab-
orators. Its formation is illustrated diagrammatically in Fig. 12. I am greatly
indebted to Dr. Rich for permission to use these illustrations. Double-strand-
ed helical structures can be formed by poly-adenylic acid in solution. The
elegant              experiments of Doty and collaborators34 have shown that, above

         Table 5. Double- and triple-stranded polynucleotide complexes.


                            1959 S.OCHOA




Fig.11. Hydrogen-bonding system in poly A + U and poly A + U + U. The hy-
         drogen bonds are represented by dashed lines (Courtesy of A. Rich).


 neutral pH, poly A exists in solution as a random coil but the chains are
joined to form a helical complex at pH values below neutrality. This trans-
 formation is reversible and has a sharp transition point. The various types
 of polyribonucleotide complexes thus far obtained are listed in Table 5.
    The above studies may be of importance for a better understanding of the
 physical-chemical interactions underlying the role of DNA in cell division.
 These interactions may also play a role in the biological behavior of RNA.
 Since there are good indications that the genetic information stored in DNA
 is first transmitted to RNA, it is believed that DNA may function as a tem-
 plate for RNA replication. Oncoming ribonucleotide residues could be
 linked into an organized polynucleotide chain growing in the helical groove
 of the native, double-stranded DNA molecule to form a triple-stranded
 helix. Alternatively, a single-stranded DNA template might be used to give
 a double-stranded DNA-RNA helix 35-37.
    The work of Kornberg and his collaborators38 has given us deep insight


         ENZYMATIC SYNTHESIS OF RIBONUCLEIC ACID                                661




Fig. 12. Diagram showing the combination of two random coil molecules of poly-
adenylic and polyribo-thymidylic acid to form a double-stranded helix. The bases are
                  represented by short rods (Courtesy of A. Rich).

into the mode of replication of DNA and may lead in the not too distant
future to the synthesis of genetic material in the test tube. Since RNA is the
genetic material of some viruses, the work reviewed in this lecture may help
to pave the way for the artificial synthesis of biologically active viral RNA
and the synthesis of viruses. These particles are at the threshold of life and
appear to hold the clue to a better understanding of some of its most funda-
mental principles.



 1. M. Grunberg-Manago and S. Ochoa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 77 (1955) 3165.
 2. M. Grunberg-Manago, P. J. Ortiz, and S. Ochoa, Science, 122 (1955) 907.
 3. S. Ochoa, Federation Proc., 15 (1956) 832.
 4. M. Grunberg-Manago, P. J. Ortiz, and S. Ochoa, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 20 (1956)
     269.
 5. B. E. Griffin, A. Todd, and A. Rich, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S., 44 (1958) 1123.


662                             1959 S.OCHOA

 6. S. Ochoa and L. A. Heppel, in The Chemical Basis Of Heredity, W. D. McElroy and
     B. Glass (Eds.), Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore, 1957, p. 615; S. Ochoa, in Cellular
     Biology, Nucleic Acids, and Viruses, N.Y. Acad. of Sci., Spec. Publ., 5 (1957) 191.
 7. L. A. Heppel, P. J. Ortiz, and S. Ochoa, J. Biol. Chem., 229 (1957) 679.
 8. L. A. Heppel, P. J. Ortiz, and S. Ochoa, J. Biol. Chem., 229 (1957) 695.
 9. P. J. Ortiz and S. Ochoa, J. Biol. Chem., 234 (1959) 1208.
10. K. Tanaka, F. Egami, T. Hayashi, J. E. Winter, A. W. Bemheimer, S. Mii, P. J.
     Ortiz, and S. Ochoa, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 25 (1957) 663.
11. A. Tiselius, S. Hjertén, and Ö. Levin, Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 65 (1956) 132.
12. S. Ochoa, XI Conseil de Chimie Solvay, Bruxelles, June, 1959.
13. M. F. Singer, L. A. Heppel, and R. J. Hilmoe, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 26 (1957) 447.
14. S. Mii and S. Ochoa, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 26 (1957) 445; S. Ochoa, S. Mii, and
     M. C. Schneider, Proc. Intern. Symp. Enzyme Chem., Tokyo Kyoto, 2 (1957) 44.
15. L. A. Heppel, P. J. Ortiz, and S. Ochoa, Science, 123 (1956) 415.
16. M. F. Singer, L. A. Heppel, and R. J. Hilmoe, J. Biol. Chem., 235 (1960) 738.
17. D. O. Brummond, M. Staehelin, and S. Ochoa, J. Biol. Chem., 229 (1957) 835;
     S. Ochoa, in Recent Progress in Microbiology, Symp. 7th Intern. Congr. Microbial.,
     Stockholm, 2 (1958) 122.
18. U. Z. Littauer and A. Komberg, J. Biol. Chem., 226 (1957) 1077.
19. R. F. Beers, Jr., Nature, 177 (1956) 790.
20. R. J. Hilmoe and L. A. Heppel, J. Am. Chem. Soc, 79 (1957) 4810.
21. J. Skoda, J. Kara, A. Sormova, and F. Šorm, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 33 (1959) 579.
22. L. I. Hecht, P. C. Zamecnik, M. L. Stephenson, and J. F. Scott, J. Biol. Chem., 233
     (1958) 954.
23. E. S. Canellakis, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 25 (1957) 217.
24. J. Hurwitz, A. Bresler, and A. Kaye, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 1(1959) 3.
25. E. Goldwasser, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 77 (1955) 6083.
26. S. B. Weiss and L. Gladstone, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 81 (1959) 4118.
27. R. C. Warner, Federation Proc., 15 (1956) 379; J. Biol. Chem., 229 (1957) 711.
28. A. Rich and D. R. Davies, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 78 (1956) 3548; A. Rich, in The
     Chemical Basis of Heredity, W. D. McElroy and B. Glass (Eds.), Johns Hopkins
     Press, Baltimore, 1957, p. 557.
29. J. D. Watson and F. H. C. Crick, Nature, 171 (1953) 737.
30. R. C. Warner and E.Breslow, Symp. 4th Intern. Congr. Biochem., Vienna, 9(1958) 157.
31. G. Felsenfeld and A. Rich, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 26. (1957) 457; A. Rich, in
     Cellular Biology, Nucleic Acids, and Viruses, N.Y. Academy of Sciences, Spec. Publ.,
     5 (1957) 186.
32. A. Rich, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 29 (1958) 502.
33. A. Rich, Nature, 181 (1958) 521.
34. J. R. Fresco and P. Doty, J. Am. Chem. Soc, 79 (1957) 3928; J. R. Fresco and E.
     Klemperer, Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sri., 81 (1959) 730.
35. G. Stent, Advan. Virus Res., 5 (1958) 138.
36. G. Zubay, Nature, 182 (1958) 1290.
37. A. Rich, Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci., 81 (1959) 709.
38. A. Kornberg, This Volume, pp. 665-680.
