                The Winding Road
                to Pluripotency
                Nobel Lecture, December 7, 2012

                by Shinya Yamanaka
                Center for iPS Cell Research and Application (CiRA), Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.
                Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.



                INTRODUCTION

                John Gurdon received recognition for his landmark achievement in 1962, which
                provided the first experimental evidence of reprogramming by the transplanta-
                tion of amphibian somatic cell nuclei into enucleated oocytes [1]. This break-
                through in technology introduced a new paradigm; that each nucleus of a dif-
                ferentiated cell retains a complete set of blueprints for the whole body, while
                oocytes possess a certain potential for reprogramming.
                    Inspired by this paradigm shift and subsequent research achievements, we
                identified four transcription factors that could induce pluripotency in somatic
                cells by their forced expression and successfully consolidated effective repro-
                gramming methods in mouse cells in 2006 [2] and in human cells in 2007 [3].
                The established reprogrammed cells were named “induced pluripotent stem
                (iPS) cells.” I would like to provide an overview focusing on the experimental
                background of the generation of iPS cells, and the future perspectives regarding
                iPS cell research, which has been developing rapidly.


                MY EARLY DAYS AS A SCIENTIST

                I graduated from Kobe University School of Medicine, Japan, and obtained my
                medical license in 1987. I decided to become an orthopedic surgeon and started
                my training as a resident in Osaka, Japan. During my school days, I had practiced

                                                                                                                263




Book.indb 263                                                                                                     3/24/14 12:59 PM


        264                                                                   The Nobel Prizes




        Figure 1. My first experiment as a graduate student. Intravenous injection of a vasoac-
        tive molecule platelet activating factor (PAF) caused a transient decrease in blood pres-
        sure in dogs (upper panel). We hypothesized that this hypotension would be blocked
        by pretreatment with a thromboxane A2 inhibitor (lower left panel). Unexpectedly, we
        observed a profound hypotension (lower right panel).


        judo and played rugby, and injured myself many times, including more than 10
        fractures throughout my body. It was thus natural for me to have become inter-
        ested in orthopedic surgery. I especially wanted to treat patients suffering from
        sport injuries and overtraining.
             In 1989, however, my life took a new turn from clinical medicine in orthope-
        dic surgery to basic science research for two reasons. First, I found that I was not
        a very talented surgeon. Second, I saw many patients suffering from intractable
        diseases and injuries, which even highly talented surgeons and physicians were
        not able to cure. For example, I had encountered patients suffering from spinal
        cord injuries, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and osteosarcomas. Furthermore, I
        lost my father due to liver cirrhosis during my residency. Basic medical research
        is the only way to find cures for these patients. For these reasons, I decided to go
        back to school. I became a Ph.D. student at Osaka City University Medical School
        in April of 1989.
             Among the many departments at the school, I applied to the Department
        of Pharmacology, directed by Dr. Kenjiro Yamamoto. At the interview, I was not
        able to answer many questions about pharmacology, because I had not studied




Book.indb 264                                                                                       3/24/14 12:59 PM


                The Winding Road to Pluripotency                                                265


                pharmacology well enough when I was a medical student. Instead, I tried to
                convince the interviewer, Dr. Fumihiko Ikemoto, that I really wanted to do
                basic medical research, despite my lack of knowledge. I am so grateful that
                Dr. Ike-moto accepted me into the department. Dr. Ikemoto repeatedly told
                me that we should not perform research that simply reproduced somebody
                else’s re-sults. Rather, we should do something unique and new. During my
                training as a scientist, I was very fortunate to have two types of teachers:
                namely, great men-tors and unexpected results from my experiments.
                    My direct mentor at the graduate school was Dr. Katsuyuki Miura. In my first
                few months as a Ph.D. student, Dr. Miura told me to read as many manuscripts
                as possible and propose new projects. I felt like I was given a blank canvas and
                told that I could draw whatever I wanted. This mentorship was very different
                from what I had experienced during my residency. At the hospital, I’d had little
                freedom, and had to follow instructions from senior physicians and textbooks. I
                thought “wow, I like this system!” Another thing that Dr. Miura often told me was
                that we were competing worldwide. Whatever project you chose, you will com-
                pete with other scientists throughout the world, mostly in the U.S. or Europe, on
                the same or similar projects. This was again very different from my experience
                at the hospital, where I was competing only with other residents at the same
                hospital. The idea of “worldwide” competition had never entered my mind when
                I was working at the hospital. For all of these reasons, I found that basic research
                was a more suitable career, based on my interests and temperament.
                    In the summer of 1989, I was still struggling to find my project. Dr. Miura
                proposed a simpler project to begin my research studies. He suggested that I ex-
                amine the role of a vasoactive molecule, platelet activating factor (PAF), in dogs
                to study the regulation of blood pressure (Fig. 1). Because it was known that
                the intravenous injection of PAF into dogs caused a transient decrease in blood
                pressure (transient hypotension), Dr. Miura hypothesized that this decrease in
                blood pressure would be mediated by another vasoactive molecule, thrombox-
                ane A2. If that hypothesis was correct, then pretreatment with a thromboxane
                A2 inhibitor should block the PAF-induced transient decrease in blood pressure.
                My first experiment, where I treated dogs with an inhibitor of thromboxane A2,
                was performed based on his hypothesis, and I had expected no decrease in
                the blood pressure in the pretreated dogs. It should have been a simple ex-
                periment suitable for a beginner. However, the result was totally unexpected.
                In the beginning, the thromboxane A2 inhibitor did not seem to be effective,
                with subsequent PAF treatment inducing the normal transient decrease in the
                blood pressure. Surprisingly, however, a few minutes after the treatment, a pro-
                found and prolonged decrease in blood pressure was observed, which we had




Book.indb 265                                                                                      3/24/14 12:59 PM


        266                                                               The Nobel Prizes


        never observed following treatment with PAF alone (Fig. 1). I got so excited! I ran
        into Dr. Miura’s office to report this result excitedly. Although the result did not
        support his hypothesis, Dr. Miura responded with excitement, too, and encour-
        aged me to explore the finding further. I spent another two years uncovering
        the mechanism responsible for this unexpected result [4, 5]. I was extremely
        lucky to obtain this kind of unexpected result in my very first experiment as a
        graduate student.
            The fact that I got very excited with the result clearly told me that I had
        found the correct career. During my thesis work, however, I was often frustrated
        by my scientific approach, which relied on pharmacological tools, such as in-
        hibitors and agonists. No drug can be 100% specific or effective, so there are
        always non-specific activities or incomplete blockade of the targets. In contrast,
        I was fascinated by the emerging gene engineering technologies being demon-
        strated in mice, especially the knockout mouse technology, by which any gene
        of interest could be deleted with 100% specificity and efficacy. There were a
        few groups in Japan who brought the technology from the U.S. or Europe to
        their pharmacological studies. This technology seemed like a miracle to me. I
        really wanted to utilize the knockout mouse technology in my own research.
        Therefore, in order to learn about the genetic engineering of mice, I decided
        to become a postdoctoral fellow in the U.S., where the technology was being
        widely used in many laboratories. I check advertisements in journals such as
        Nature, Science and Cell, and applied to as many laboratories as possible. The
        very first person who replied to my application was Dr. Thomas (Tom) Innerarity
        at the Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, San Francisco (Fig. 2). After a
        short interview by telephone, Tom offered me a position. In April 1993, I crossed
        the Pacific Ocean with my wife and two little daughters.
            In Tom’s laboratory, I started working on the mechanisms underlying the
        gene expression of Apo B (Apolipoprotein B), which is a constituent of LDL (low-
        density lipoprotein) and thought to be important in cholesterol regulation. In
        particular, we focused on an mRNA editing factor, APOBEC1 (Apo B mRNA edit-
        ing catalytic subunit 1) to analyze its gene function. Our original objective was to
        explore the possibility of using gene therapy for familial hypercholesterolemia
        to prevent atherosclerosis. Tom hypothesized that the overexpression of APO-
        BEC1 in the liver would lower the plasma cholesterol levels, and he planned
        to examine this possibility using transgenic mice that overexpressed APOBEC1
        in a liver-specific manner. I worked very hard and was able to quickly gener-
        ate transgenic mouse lines. However, we observed totally unexpected results.
        We found that there was abdominal expansion of transgenic mice as if they




Book.indb 266                                                                                   3/24/14 12:59 PM


                The Winding Road to Pluripotency                                                    267




                Figure 2. Days at the Gladstone Institute as a Postdoctoral Fellow. A picture taken with
                Dr. Thomas Innerarity in his laboratory (1995, Gladstone Institutes).


                were pregnant, regardless of whether they were male or female. An exception-
                ally high incidence of liver tumor in these mice was confirmed by autopsy (Fig.
                3) [6]. It turned out that APOBEC1 is a very potent oncogene. Therefore, we
                can never use this gene for gene therapy. Again, I got very excited about this
                unexpected result, although it indicated that APOBEC1 could not be used to
                prevent atherosclerosis, thereby effectively halting my previous line of research.
                Although it contradicted his hypothesis, Dr. Innerarity kept supporting me while
                I decided to work on liver cancer, showing a similar excitement as Dr. Miura did
                in response to the unexpected results. He encouraged me to keep working on
                APOBEC1 to elucidate the mechanism by which it led to cancer formation. I
                became the only person who worked on liver cancer at the Gladstone Institute
                of Cardiovascular Diseases.
                     I met another person who ended up being very important in my life at Glad-
                stone. It was the then president of the institute, Dr. Robert Mahley. He once told
                us (postdoctoral fellows) about how to become successful in science. He said
                the secret was “VW.” He had and still has a Volkswagen car, but in this case, VW
                did not mean Volkswagen. Instead, he meant vision and hard work. Dr. Mahley




Book.indb 267                                                                                              3/24/14 12:59 PM


        268                                                                  The Nobel Prizes




        Figure 3. Hepatocellular Carcinoma in APOBEC-1 transgenic mouse. Livers from non-
        transgenic control mouse (left) and transgenic mouse (right). [6] (© 1995, the National
        Academy of Sciences)




        told us to have a clear vision and then work hard toward that goal. I was working
        very hard day and night. However, I realized I did not have a clear vision. Why am
        I doing many of my experiments? Why did I quit working at hospitals to become
        a postdoctoral fellow in the U.S.? I then realized that my vision or motivation
        for doing science was to contribute to patient health and longevity. Of course,
        we cannot immediately help any patients by doing experiments in laboratories.
        However, basic medical research has the potential to help thousands of patients
        suffering from intractable diseases and injuries.
            As noted above, I very was fortunate to have two types of great teachers in
        my early days as a scientist. First, my mentors, including Dr. Miura, Dr. Innerar-
        ity and Dr. Mahley, encouraged me to continue my projects despite the fact
        that the results contradicted their hypotheses. They served as models of good
        mentors for me to follow. The other great teacher was nature itself, which gave
        me totally unexpected results that led me to completely new research themes.
        Without these two types of great “teachers,” I could have never initiated my re-
        search that led to the generation of iPS cells.




Book.indb 268                                                                                     3/24/14 12:59 PM


                The Winding Road to Pluripotency269


                THE RESEARCH THAT LED TO THE PRODUCTION OF iPS CELLS

                What brought me to cell reprogramming biology was another set of totally un-
                expected experimental results and an encounter with ES (embryonic stem) cells
                through my research experience, along with related scientific streams. While
                trying to elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying the carcinogenesis
                induced by APOBEC1, I discovered an interesting molecule that was a novel tar-
                get of APOBEC1. I named this molecule NAT1 (Novel APOBEC1 Target #1) [7]. We
                found that the overexpression of APOBEC1 resulted in aberrant editing at nu-
                merous sites of the NAT1 mRNA, including those that generated premature ter-
                mination codons. Consequently, the NAT1 protein levels were markedly reduced.
                I also found that the NAT1 protein was similar to eukaryotic translation initiation
                factor (eIF) 4G and likely functioned as a translational regulator. Based on these
                observations, I hypothesized that NAT1 could function as a tumor suppressor
                gene. In order to examine this hypothesis, I decided to generate NAT1 knockout
                mice. At that time, I had learned the skills necessary for generating knockout
                mice, including the preparation of targeting vectors and cultivation of mouse ES
                cells from Dr. Robert Farese Jr., a friend of mine who established the ES cell and
                knockout core laboratory at Gladstone. This was how I first encountered ES cells.
                     Again I worked very hard. Three years had passed since I joined Gladstone,
                and my wife had to go back to Japan because we decided to send our elder
                daughter to an elementary school there. After my family left San Francisco, I
                worked even harder. I really wanted to find out the function of NAT1, the gene
                I had identified myself. Without my family at home, I did not have anything else
                to do. I literally worked day and night. I generated a targeting vector quickly and
                was able to obtain targeted ES cell clones. I asked the knockout core laboratory
                to inject the targeted ES cells into mouse blastocysts to generate chimeric mice.
                I was happy about the scientific progress I was making.
                     At the same time, however, I felt lonelier and lonelier without my family. The
                only way to live with my family was to go back to Japan. However, I was unable
                to find a good position in Japan. Fortunately, I obtained a fellowship from the
                Japanese Government and decided to go back to Japan for a second postdoc-
                toral fellowship. Owing to the invaluable help and generosity of Dr. Innerarity,
                I was able to continue the research on NAT1 after I returned to Japan at Osaka
                City University Medical School. The following year, I became an assistant profes-
                sor and continued working on NAT1.
                     The generation of the NAT1 knockout mice went smoothly. We obtained
                good chimeric mice, and subsequently, F1 heterozygous mutant mice. Tom sent




Book.indb 269                                                                                     3/24/14 12:59 PM


        270                                                                The Nobel Prizes


        those F1 mice to me. However, I could not obtain homozygous mutant mice
        from intercrossing the heterozygous mutants, thus suggesting that NAT1 was
        indispensable for mouse development. I then struggled with the analyses of
        mutant embryos, since neither I nor anyone around me had ever worked on
        mouse embryogenesis. I learned how to dissect embryos by reading textbooks.
        With great encouragement from my colleagues, including Dr. Katsuyuki Miura, I
        finally showed that NAT1 mutant embryos died around the time of implantation.
            In order to further characterize the functions of NAT1, I generated homo-
        zygous deletion mutant ES cells. In found that NAT1-null ES cells proliferated
        normally when they were maintained on undifferentiated feeder cells. However,
        when they were cultured without feeder cells or leukemia inhibitory factor, I
        observed marked differences. Under these conditions, the wild-type ES cells
        rapidly differentiated in terms of their morphology and gene expression. In con-
        trast, mutant ES cells showed resistance to differentiation. This meant that NAT1
        is essential for maintaining the pluripotency of ES cells [8]. This was the pivotal
        moment when ES cells became my main research subject. My future career de-
        veloped from merely a research tool (knockout mouse construction), thanks to
        the unexpected results of the NAT1 functional analysis. This unexpected result
        changed my project again—from cancer to ES cells.
            Mammalian ES cells were first derived from mouse embryos in 1981 by Dr.
        Martin Evans, and also by Dr. Gail R. Martin. ES cells have two important proper-
        ties [9, 10]. The first is their rapid proliferation, which can be considered to pro-
        vide them with immortality. The other important property is pluripotency, the
        ability to differentiate into virtually all types of somatic and germ cells that exist
        in the body. NAT1 is essential for pluripotency, but not for the rapid proliferation
        of mouse ES cells. Because of the important role of NAT1, I became very inter-
        ested in the biology of ES cells.
            Although I was obtaining important results about the molecular functions
        of NAT1, I started to become frustrated and wondered whether my basic re-
        search could eventually contribute to clinical medicine, which was my true goal.
        I was working at the medical school, where most of my colleagues participated
        in medical research projects, such as drug development or understanding the
        pathophysiology of diseases. My vision was (and still is) to contribute to the lives
        of patients through basic research, but I was not sure whether working on NAT1
        and mouse ES cells could realize my vision. At that time, my colleagues often
        told me that, “Shinya, those mouse cells may be interesting, but you should do
        something more closely related to human disease and human medicine.” Very
        luckily, however, two events happened in the late 90s, which encouraged me to
        continue working on ES cells.




Book.indb 270                                                                                    3/24/14 12:59 PM


                The Winding Road to Pluripotency                                                271


                     The first event was the generation of human ES cells by Dr. James Thom-
                son at the University of Wisconsin in 1998 [11]. Immediately after this paper was
                published, the ES cell research field began to draw public attention because of
                its potential value in regenerative medicine. Human ES cells have the two same
                properties as mouse ES cells, rapid proliferation and pluripotency. Human ES
                cells can be expanded indefinitely, and they can be used to generate various
                types of human somatic cells, such as dopaminergic neurons, neural stem cells,
                cardiac cells, and so on. These human cells should then be able to be used to
                treat patients suffering from various diseases and injuries, such as Parkinson’s
                disease, spinal cord injuries, etc. So again, it turned out that ES cells themselves
                could help patients, not mouse patients, but human patients. When I first read
                the landmark paper by Dr. Thomson, I got very excited—I still remember that
                moment. However, the generation and use of human ES cells is associated with
                an ethical obstacle regarding the use of human embryos. In Japan, we were not
                allowed to use human ES cells. Thus, human ES cell research was a distant and
                forbidden world to me then.
                     The other event that encouraged me was my promotion. I had a chance to
                organize my own laboratory. In 1999, I moved to the Nara Institute of Science
                and Technology (NAIST) as an associate professor. In 1998, I found an advertise-
                ment for that position in a Japanese scientific magazine. It said that the institute
                was seeking a scientist at the associate professor level who would run his or her
                own laboratory while organizing a core facility for mouse genetic engineering
                for the institute. It seemed a perfect position for me, and I decided to apply for
                the position. I did not expect to be chosen, since I had only published a few pa-
                pers using the technology. Surprisingly, however, I was provided an opportunity
                to give a job seminar at the institute, and more surprisingly, I got the position!
                     In December of that year, I entered through the main gate of the NAIST with
                excitement and nervousness. The NAIST is one of only a few national universities
                that only have graduate schools in Japan (most also have medical and dental
                schools). It has a beautiful campus, good equipment, talented faculty members,
                and, most importantly, highly motivated and brilliant graduate students. My
                frustration disappeared unconsciously. Because of these two events, the gen-
                eration of human ES cells and my promotion to associate professor at the NAIST,
                I was able to continue my research on ES cells.
                     Then the word “VW” came to my mind again. Now that I was starting my own
                laboratory, I decided that I needed to have a clear vision or long term goal that
                I was going to share with future lab members. Many laboratories working on ES
                cells, including those famous in the field, were working on in vitro directed dif-
                ferentiation of cells into various lineages, such as cardiac myocytes and neuronal




Book.indb 271                                                                                      3/24/14 12:59 PM


        272                                                               The Nobel Prizes


        cells. I did not think it would be wise to compete with these laboratories, since
        my lab was very small and new. I decided to do the opposite. I decided that the
        goal of my laboratory would be to establish ES cell-like pluripotent stem cells
        that were not derived from embryos, but from differentiated somatic cells. By
        achieving this goal, we would be able to overcome the obstacles facing the
        development of medicine using human ES cells, namely, the use of human em-
        bryos and immune rejection after transplantation. I thus started trying to repro-
        gram somatic cells back into the embryonic state.
            I knew reprogramming was possible, at least in theory. Somatic cell repro-
        gramming techniques had been developed by several groups. For example, Dr.
        Ian Wilmut succeeded in generating a first cloned mammal, “Dolly” the sheep,
        by transplanting the nucleus of a fully developed cell into an enucleated egg
        [12]. However, the efficiency of the method was extremely low. In addition, it
        had been pointed out that this system was technically quite difficult to apply
        to primates, including humans. Another example was the cell fusion technique
        between ES cells and somatic cells to attain pluripotency [13]. However, the re-
        sultant fused cells did not seem to be suitable for application in a clinical setting
        due to the generation of tetraploid cells. However, the fact that somatic cells
        were able to attain pluripotency following nuclear transplantation or fusion with
        ES cells provided a lot of scientific encouragement, because it led us to hypothe-
        size that oocytes or ES cells contain intrinsic factors that can reprogram somatic
        cells into a pluripotent state.
            In addition to this background, there were also other discoveries of master
        transcription factors involved in vertebrate development, such as Antennapedia
        in the fly [14] or MyoD in the mouse [15]. From these findings, it was a simple
        logical step to deduce that a combination of factors should be able to induce
        pluripotency in somatic cells. I just did not know which or how many factors
        were required. When we first started our research, it could have been one, sev-
        eral, one hundred or even more, and we thought at that time that the project
        would take 10, 20, 30 years or even longer to complete.
            I hypothesized that many of the reprograming factors are expressed pre-
        dominantly in eggs and ES cells. In order to search for factors that are specifi-
        cally expressed in ES cells, we planned to utilize an EST (expressed sequence
        tag) database, which is a kind of catalog of genes that are expressed in each
        tissue or organ, obtained by random sequencing of cDNA libraries made from
        tissues or organs in various species. In a timely fashion, large quantities of mouse
        EST data were disclosed by RIKEN [16]. Furthermore, a program that analyzed
        EST databases to predict the expression pattern of each gene became available
        from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) [17]. I utilized




Book.indb 272                                                                                   3/24/14 12:59 PM


                The Winding Road to Pluripotency                                                273


                this program, designated an in silico differential display, to compare EST libraries
                from mouse ES cells and those from various somatic tissues. I was immediately
                able to identify multiple genes that were highly and specifically expressed in un-
                differentiated mouse ES cells and early embryos. Among them, we particularly
                focused on the genes with the highest enrichment. These included well-known
                genes, such as Oct3/4 [18, 19], Utf1 [20] and Rex1 [21], which had been experi-
                mentally identified as ES cell-specific markers. This confirmed the usefulness of
                this approach. We designated other ES cell-enriched genes “ES cell-associated
                transcripts” (ECATs). We confirmed the ES cell-specific expression of ECATs by
                performing northern blot analyses [22–24].
                     I characterized the functions of ECATs in ES cells and mice with the new
                members who had joined my lab, including three graduate students, Eiko Kaiho,
                Yoshimi Tokuzawa and Kazutoshi Takahashi. I was lucky to have these talented
                and hard-working students with me from the beginning. Furthermore, I was
                very fortunate to have Tomoko Ichisaka in my lab, as a technical staff member of
                the core facility for mouse molecular engineering. I believe that Tomoko is one
                of the best technicians in terms of the manipulation of mouse embryos in Japan,
                and maybe in the world. Thanks to Tomoko and the core facility, we were able to
                generate knockout mice to examine many ECATs.
                     The first gene we knocked out in mice at the NAIST was ECAT3, also known
                as Fbox15. These mice were part of Yoshimi Tokuzawa’s project. Yoshimi, To-
                moko and I were very happy when we obtained the first targeted ES line, the
                first chimeric mice and then germ-line transmission. However, when we gen-
                erated homozygous mutant mice lacking the functional ECAT3 gene, we did
                not observe any obvious phenotypes [22]. Because of its specific expression in
                mouse ES cells and embryos, we expected that its disruption would result in
                early lethality during embryogenesis. Furthermore, we showed that Fbox15 is
                a direct target of Oct3/4 and Sox2, another transcription factor essential for the
                maintenance of pluripotency [25]. On the contrary, we obtained homozygous
                mutant mice in accordance with the Mendelian law from heterozygous inter-
                crosses. Yoshimi then generated homozygous mutant ES cell lines, hoping that
                she would observe drastic phenotypes. However, again, we did not see any sig-
                nificant changes. ECAT3-null ES cells proliferated normally and showed normal
                differentiation potentials. Thus, both the ECAT3 knockout mice and ES cells were
                apparently normal. This often happened with other ECATs. These experiences
                reminded us that science is often tough.
                     An exception was ECAT4, a transcription factor that was later re-named
                Nanog. We and others found that Nanog played important roles in the main-
                tenance of pluripotency in mouse ES cell [24, 26]. Nanog was also essential for




Book.indb 273                                                                                      3/24/14 12:59 PM


        274                                                            The Nobel Prizes


        mouse embryonic development before implantation. In addition to Nanog, Yo-
        shimi Tokuzawa identified another transcription factor, Klf4 that played impor-
        tant roles in mouse ES cells. Another group reported the important role of the
        well-known oncogene, c-Myc, in pluripotency. By 2004, we had identified a total
        of 24 factors, including Oct3/4, Sox2, c-Myc, Nanog, other ECATs and Klf4, as
        candidate reprogramming factors.
            What we then needed was a sensitive and rapid assay system to screen
        these candidate factors. It turned out that the Fbox15-null knockout mice pro-
        vided such an assay system. When we made knockout mice of Fbox-15 and
        other ECATs, we utilized a gene trap strategy, in which we knocked the neo-
        mycin resistance gene into the gene of interest. Thus, in ECAT3 knockout cells,
        the neomycin resistance gene is expressed from the enhancer and promoter of
        ECAT3, which was active only in ES cells and early embryos, but not in somatic
        cells. Somatic cells, such as mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) derived from
        the ECAT3 knockout mice are sensitive to G418, whereas ECAT3 knockout ES
        cells were resistant to high concentrations of G418. Based on these results, we
        expected that if any of the 24 candidates could actually induce pluripotency
        in ECAT3 knockout MEFs, the reprogrammed cells would become resistant to
        G418. We confirmed this strategy by using a fusion reprogramming system. The
        ECAT3 knockout mice that showed few phenotypes and thus disappointed Yo-
        shimi and me turned out to provide a very useful assay system to evaluate can-
        didate reprogramming factors.
            My lab moved to Kyoto University in 2005, with the 24 gene candidates,
        the ECAT3-based assay system and Tomoko Ichisaka and Kazutoshi Takahashi. In
        Kyoto, I asked Kazutoshi Takahashi to examine the 24 factors by using the assay
        system [2]. To tell the truth, we did not expect that we had the answer among
        these 24 factors. We thought we had to screen many more factors, and had
        already started to prepare cDNA libraries from mouse ES cells and testes. Never-
        theless, Kazutoshi introduced each of the 24 candidate genes, one by one, into
        ECAT3 knockout MEFs by retroviral transduction. As, in a sense, expected, we did
        not obtain any drug-resistant colonies using any single factor, thus indicating
        that no single candidate gene was sufficient to elicit reprograming and induce
        pluripotency. In addition to the single factor transduction, Kazutoshi proposed
        to transduce all 24 factors together into ECAT3 knockout MEFs as a practice
        for performing a cDNA library screening. It was like a mini-library consisting of
        24 cDNAs. To our surprise, four weeks after transduction, we obtained several
        G418-resistant colonies. I thought this might be some kind of mistake, such as
        contamination with ES cells. I asked Kazuthoshi to repeat the experiment again
        and again. It always worked. Kazutoshi picked up the G418-resistant colonies




Book.indb 274                                                                               3/24/14 12:59 PM


                The Winding Road to Pluripotency275


                for expansion. We found that these cells were expandable and showed a mor-
                phology similar to that of mouse ES cells. A reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR)
                analysis revealed that the iPS-MEF24 clones expressed ES cell markers, including
                Oct3/4, Nanog, E-Ras, Cripto, Dax1, Zfp296 [24] and Fgf4 [27].
                     Next, to determine which of the 24 candidates were critical, Kazutoshi ex-
                amined the effects of withdrawal of individual factors from the pool of trans-
                duced candidate genes. ES cell-like colonies did not form when either Oct3/4
                or Klf4 was removed. The removal of Sox2 resulted in only a few ES-like colonies.
                When he removed c-Myc, the ES cell-like colonies did emerge, but these had a
                flatter, non-ES-cell-like morphology. Removal of the remaining factors did not
                significantly affect the colony numbers or characteristics. We finally showed
                that a combination of four genes, Oct3/4, Klf4, Sox2 and c-Myc was sufficient to
                produce ES cell-like colonies. These data demonstrated that pluripotency could
                be induced from MEF culture by the introduction of four transcription factors;
                Oct3/4, Sox2, c-Myc and Klf4. I designated the new pluripotent stem cells “iPS
                cells,” short for induced pluripotent stem cells.
                     We examined the pluripotency of iPS cells by the teratoma formation assay
                in animals. We obtained tumors from iPS cells after subcutaneous injection into
                nude mice. A histological examination revealed that the iPS cells differentiated
                into all three germ layers, including neural tissues, cartilage and columnar epi-
                thelium. We also examined the ability of iPS cells to produce adult chimeras. We
                injected iPS cells into mouse-derived blastocysts, which we then transplanted
                into the uteri of pseudo-pregnant mice. We obtained adult chimeras from those
                injected iPS cells as determined by the coat color of the resulting pups. From
                these chimeras, we were able to obtain F1 mice through germline transmission.
                Based on these results, we concluded that iPS cells are comparable to ES cells in
                terms of their pluripotency [28].
                     The following year, we reported the generation of iPS cells from human fi-
                broblasts using the same factors [3]. In the case of ES cells, it took 17 years to
                move from the mouse to human cells. This was in part because, although mouse
                ES cells and human ES cells share many similar features, they are very different
                in many aspects, including the culture conditions and morphology. In the case
                of iPS cells, it took much less time. This was because we already knew both how
                to culture human pluripotent stem cells and what they should look like. In other
                words, we could have never generated human iPS cells without the previous
                reports on human ES cells.
                     The generation of iPS cells was an exceptional experience in my scientific
                career, in that everything went smoothly. In all other cases, my career has been
                full of failures. This luck resulting from the dedicated work of young researchers,




Book.indb 275                                                                                     3/24/14 12:59 PM


        276                                                                The Nobel Prizes


        especially three people, Kazutoshi Takahashi, Yoshimi Tokuzawa and Tomoko
        Ichisaka. It was these three who generated the iPS cells. Without these three
        young lab members, we could have never generated the iPS cells in my labora-
        tory. Therefore, I am extremely grateful to these three and the other members of
        my lab for their tireless efforts.
            When I initiated my basic research 25 years ago, I did not imagine at all that I
        was going to work on stem cells in the future. It was the unexpected results from
        PAF, APOBEC1 transgenic mice and the NAT1 knockout mice that brought me to
        the new field. The encouragement from my mentors, including Drs. Yamamoto,
        Miura, Innerarity and Mahley was essential for me to continue my work as a sci-
        entist. I am grateful to my two types of teachers, these mentors and nature itself.


        THE POTENTIAL APPLICATIONS OF iPS CELLS

        One of the advantages of the iPS cell technology is its simplicity and reproduc-
        ibility. We can now generate human iPS cells not only from skin fibroblasts, but
        also from other somatic cells, including peripheral blood cells. Hundreds of
        laboratories all over the world are now working on iPS cells, trying to apply the
        technology in medicine and in the pharmaceutical industry (Fig. 4). Without the
        iPS cell technology, it would be difficult to obtain sufficient numbers of somatic
        cells, such as heart cells or brain cells, from patients suffering from diseases af-
        fecting the heart or brain. With the iPS cell technology, all that is needed is a tiny




        Figure 4. Potential Applications of iPS Cells.




Book.indb 276                                                                                    3/24/14 12:59 PM


                The Winding Road to Pluripotency                                               277


                amount of blood cells from the patients. We can then generate iPS cells, expand
                the cells as much as we want, and then make heart cells or brain cells to specifi-
                cally study the affected tissues. These cells have the same genetic information
                as the patients and will provide unprecedented opportunities for predicting
                the toxicity of drugs, making disease models in petri dishes, performing drug
                screening and for cell transplantation therapies.
                     Many effective drugs have been withdrawn from the market because of side
                effects such as cardiac arrhythmia and liver toxicity. The best known cardiac tox-
                icity is long QT syndrome, as characterized with prolonged intervals between
                the Q and T waves in electrocardiograms, which often cause lethal arrhythmia.
                Since human heart cells are hard to obtain, pharmaceutical companies have
                been using non-cardiac cancer cell lines, into which only one cardiac gene has
                been transfected, to predict the development of long QT syndrome and other
                types of cardiac toxicity of their drug candidates. However, this artificial system
                suffers from both false positive and false negative results. Now, human cardiac
                myocytes derived from iPS cells are commercially available from multiple com-
                panies. Pharmaceutical companies are now beginning to use these cells to pre-
                dict cardiac toxicity. Similar approaches can be taken to predict the side effects
                in the liver and brain. These new types of medical application of the iPS cell
                technology are considered to be just around the corner.
                     I believe that the biggest potential of this technology resides in disease
                modeling and drug screening. Hundreds of diseases can be studied this way.
                Progress has been made in modeling intractable diseases while searching for
                new drugs with patient-derived iPS cells by many groups all over the world. To
                my surprise, it has been shown that iPS cells can be used to recapitulate the phe-
                notypes of not only monogenic diseases, but also some late-onset polygenic
                diseases, such as ALS (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, widely known in the U.S. as
                Lou Gehrig’s disease) and Alzheimer’s disease [29, 30].
                     ALS is a late-onset motor neuron disease. Most cases of ALS are sporadic,
                and are not caused by a mutation in a single gene. It has been more than 100
                years since this disease was first recognized. However, there is still no effective
                treatment, despite numerous scientific efforts. In many diseases, animal models
                have been useful to understand the mechanisms and identify effective drugs. In
                the case of ALS, animal models do exist and many drugs have been developed
                that are effective on those animal models. However, the same drugs are not
                effective in human ALS patients. Therefore, drug screening for ALS needs to be
                conducted with human cells, but it has been difficult to obtain sufficient num-
                bers of motor neurons and other affected cells from patients.




Book.indb 277                                                                                     3/24/14 12:59 PM


        278                                                                      The Nobel Prizes


             Now that iPS cells can be utilized to produce the cells of interest, many
        scientists have been generating iPS cells from ALS patients and producing
        large numbers of motor neurons having the same genetic information as the
        patients. Among them is Dr. Haruhisa Inoue at our institute (CiRA, the Center
        for iPS Cell Research and Application) [29]. Dr. Inoue demonstrated that motor
        neurons from patients had significantly shorter projections, which are necessary
        for signal transduction from the brain to muscles, than did those from healthy
        control individuals (Fig. 5). He also found that a histone acetyltransferase inhibi-
        tor, called anacardic acid, reverted the abnormal ALS motor neuron phenotype.
        In addition to ALS, scientists at the CiRA have been working on other intractable
        diseases, such as FOP (fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva) and CINCA (chronic
        infantile neurological cutaneous and articular) syndrome [31]. The findings of
        their studies have shown that patient–derived iPS cells can provide a useful tool
        for elucidating the disease pathogenesis and for screening drug candidates.

        Stem cell therapy is another promising medical application of iPS cells. In Japan
        and other countries, researchers are conducting pre-clinical studies to prove the
        efficacy and safety of iPS cells for treating various diseases and injuries, such as
        Parkinson’s disease, macular degeneration, cardiac failure, spinal cord injury and
        platelet deficiency [32]. The iPS cell technology has progressed rapidly in the
        last five years. We and others have reported an integration-free method that can
        be used to generate human iPS cells using episomal vectors [33]. We also have
        shown that p53 shRNA[34], L-Myc [35] and Glis1 [36], when strongly expressed,
        can replace the oncogene c-Myc, and efficiently generate human iPS cells. We
        have also developed systems to evaluate iPS cells. We believe that the technol-
        ogy is getting closer to clinical trials. Dr. Masayo Takahashi at the Riken Center for
        Developmental Biology (CDB) has already applied for permission to conduct an
        iPS cell-based clinical trial for macular degeneration from the Japanese Ministry
        of Health and Labor.
                          Control                                       Patient




        Figure 5. Disease Modeling of Motor Neuron from ALS Patient-Derived iPS Cells. Micro-
        scopic images of motor neurons that were differentiated from iPS cells derived from a
        control donor (left) and an ALS patient (right). [29] (© 2012, American Association for the
        Advancement of Science).




Book.indb 278                                                                                         3/24/14 12:59 PM


                The Winding Road to Pluripotency279


                    Some of these clinical trials will initially begin with autologous iPS cells de-
                rived from the patients’ own somatic cells. However, for larger scale trials and
                more standard therapies, preparing autologous iPS cells from each patient may
                not be practical, since it will be time-, labor- and cost-intensive. Generating, ex-
                panding and differentiating iPS cells under a good manufacturing protocol are
                expensive. In addition, these processes take several months. In the case of spinal
                cord injuries, it has been shown that the best result can be expected when cells
                are transplanted within a month after the onset of injury. Therefore, if the gener-
                ation, expansion and differentiation of iPS cells is started after a patient is injured,
                the cells will never be ready in time. To overcome these practical problems, we
                are now trying to establish iPS cell stocks for regenerative medicine purposes.
                To minimize immune-mediated rejection, our plan is to generate iPS cells from
                donors with HLA homozygous alleles. In Japan, we estimate that iPS cell lines
                from 140 HLA homozygotes will cover up to 90% of the Japanese population.


                SCIENTIFIC STREAMS TOWARD THE FUTURE

                I receive this prize on behalf of numerous researchers and scientists who have
                contributed to the generation and rapid progress of the iPS cell technology. As
                I described, iPS cells were established on the basis of three preexisting scientific
                streams (Fig. 6).




                Figure 6. Three Scientific Streams That Led to the Development of iPS Cells. Shown are
                landmark events with the name of senior authors and publication years.




Book.indb 279                                                                                            3/24/14 12:59 PM


        280                                                                The Nobel Prizes


             The first stream was nuclear reprogramming, initiated by Dr. John Gurdon
        more than 50 years ago. A nucleus from a fully differentiated intestinal cell of
        a tadpole was transplanted into an unfertilized egg in which the nucleus had
        been destroyed by ultraviolet light. The egg with the transplanted nucleus de-
        veloped into an adult frog, thus achieving cloning [1]. A few decades later, Dr.
        Ian Wilmut succeeded in the somatic cloning of a mammal, a sheep, for the first
        time in 1997 [12]. Although nuclear transfer in mammals is more technically de-
        manding due to the smaller cell size and physiological adjustment of the egg’s
        cell cycle, his team demonstrated the birth of a lamb by nuclear transfer from an
        adult mammary gland or differentiated fetal cells into an enucleated sheep egg.
        Their successes in somatic cloning demonstrated that even differentiated cells
        contain all of the genetic information required for the development of entire
        organisms, and that oocytes contain factors that can reprogram somatic cell
        nuclei. In 2001, Dr. Takashi Tada demonstrated that mouse ES cells also contain
        reprogramming factors by showing that the fusion of somatic cells and ES cells
        can induce reprogramming in somatic nuclei [13]. This scientific stream was es-
        sential for me to initiate our project that led to the development of iPS cells.
             The second important stream was factor-mediated cell fate conversion, first
        demonstrated by Dr. Weintraub [15]. His team converted mouse fibroblasts into
        myoblasts by forced expression of one of the myoblast-specific transcription
        factors, “MyoD.” These results led to the concept of a ‘‘master’’ transcription factor
        that determines the fate of the cell lineage.
             The third essential stream was ES cell research, which was initiated by Dr.
        Martin Evans and Dr. Gail Martin in 1981 [9, 10]. Until then, pluripotent cell lines
        had been obtained only from teratocarcinoma cells. They established pluripo-
        tent cell lines with a normal karyotype, which had been isolated directly from
        mouse early embryos in vitro. Dr. Austin Smith and others identified (and are still
        identifying) many factors which are essential for pluripotency, including Oct3/4
        and Sox2 [19, 37, 38]. In 1998, Dr. James Thomson succeeded in generating hu-
        man ES cells with optimal culture conditions, which are very different from those
        for mouse ES cells [11]. All of these findings were indispensable for providing
        ideas about the existence of reprogramming factors, the factor combinations
        and culture conditions for pluripotent cells, eventually leading to the generation
        of iPS cells.

        New scientific streams have already emerged from the iPS cell studies (Fig. 7). In
        2007, Dr. Rudolf Jaenisch provided the first proof of concept of iPS cell-based cell
        therapy in mouse models [39]. They demonstrated that mouse models of sickle




Book.indb 280                                                                                    3/24/14 12:59 PM


                The Winding Road to Pluripotency281


                cell anemia can be treated by transplantation with hematopoietic progenitors,
                which were obtained in vitro from gene-corrected autologous iPS cells.
                     In 2008, Dr. George Daley [40] and Dr. Kevin Eggan [41] first generated iPS
                cells from patients. Dr. Daley established iPS cells from patients with a variety
                of intractable diseases, such as adenosine deaminase deficiency-related severe
                combined immunodeficiency (ADA-SCID), Shwachman-Bodian-Diamond syn-
                drome (SBDS), Gaucher disease type III, Duchenne (DMD) and Becker muscular
                dystrophy (BMD), Parkinson’s disease, Huntington’s disease, juvenile-onset type
                1 diabetes mellitus, Down syndrome, Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, X-linked adreno-
                leukodystrophy, dyskeratosis congenita, Hurler syndrome, fragile X syndrome
                and NEMO deficiency [40, 42–45]. Dr. Eggan produced patient-specific iPS cells
                directly from an elderly (82-year-old) familial ALS patient, and successfully dif-
                ferentiated the iPS cells into motor neurons [41].
                     Another important scientific stream that emerged from the iPS cell technol-
                ogy is ‘‘direct reprogramming’’, which was first shown by Dr. Douglas Melton’s
                group in 2008 [46]. They reported that the cell fate can be directly transdifferen-
                tiated in vivo, in living mice, by introducing just a small number of transcription
                factors. They identified a combination of transcription factors which converted
                differentiated pancreatic exocrine cells into endocrine cells that secreted insulin.




                Figure 7. New Scientific Streams Derived from iPS Cells.




Book.indb 281                                                                                      3/24/14 12:59 PM


        282                                                                     The Nobel Prizes


        Many studies have followed, and in 2012, Dr. Deepak Srivastava provided the
        first proof of concept of therapies based on direct reprogramming in mice [47].
        They succeeded in directly converting cardiac fibroblasts into cardiac myocytes
        in situ after coronary ligation. Their results showed decreased infarct size and
        recovery of some cardiac functions.
             The history of iPS cell research has only just begun, and this technology has
        a remarkable potential for use in cell therapy, drug screening and personalized
        medicine. Unexpected results have opened up an entirely new research field. I
        hope that iPS cells will be utilized by many scientists in multiple research areas
        related to medicine or biology, and that some of those researchers will also re-
        ceive a Nobel Prize for their excellent work in the near future.


        ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

        I would like to express my sincere gratitude to all of the members of the Center
        for iPS Cell Research and Application at Kyoto University, and the Gladstone In-
        stitutes in San Francisco for their continuous support of my scientific research
        and life. I wish to thank all of the previous and current colleagues in my labora-
        tory for their dedicated and tireless efforts.
             My deepest gratitude goes to my family for their unflagging support
        throughout my life. I could not be here today without them. Although my father,
        who talked me into pursuing a career in medicine, and my father-in-law, who
        showed me how to be a good doctor, are no longer with us, I believe they all
        share our happiness and joy in heaven. I sincerely wish to help make this iPS cell
        technology a clinical reality before I meet both of my fathers again in the future.


        REFERENCES
          1. Gurdon, J.B., “The developmental capacity of nuclei taken from intestinal epithelium
             cells of feeding tadpoles,” J Embryol Exp Morphol, 1962. 10: p. 622–40.
          2. Takahashi, K. and S. Yamanaka, “Induction of pluripotent stem cells from mouse
             embryonic and adult fibroblast cultures by defined factors,” Cell, 2006. 126(4): p.
             663–676.
          3. Takahashi, K., et al., “Induction of pluripotent stem cells from adult human fibroblasts
             by defined factors,” Cell, 2007. 131(5): p. 861–72.
          4. Yamanaka, S., et al., “Putative mechanism of hypotensive action of platelet-activating
             factor in dogs,” Circ Res, 1992. 70(5): p. 893–901.
          5. Yamanaka, S., et al., “Effect of the platelet-activating factor antagonist, TCV-309, and
             the cyclo-oxygenase inhibitor, ibuprofen, on the haemodynamic changes in canine
             experimental endotoxic shock,” Br J Pharmacol, 1993. 110(4): p. 1501–7.




Book.indb 282                                                                                           3/24/14 12:59 PM


                The Winding Road to Pluripotency283


                 6. Yamanaka, S., et al., “Apolipoprotein B mRNA-editing protein induces hepatocellular
                    carcinoma and dysplasia in transgenic animals,” Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 1995. 92(18):
                    p. 8483–7.
                 7. Yamanaka, S., et al., “A novel translational repressor mRNA is edited extensively in
                    livers containing tumors caused by the transgene expression of the apoB mRNA-
                    editing enzyme,” Genes Dev, 1997. 11(3): p. 321–33.
                 8. Yamanaka, S., et al., “Essential role of NAT1/p97/DAP5 in embryonic differentiation
                    and the retinoic acid pathway,” Embo J, 2000. 19(20): p. 5533–41.
                 9. Evans, M.J. and M.H. Kaufman, “Establishment in culture of pluripotential cells from
                    mouse embryos,” Nature, 1981. 292(5819): p. 154–6.
                10. Martin, G.R., “Isolation of a pluripotent cell line from early mouse embryos cultured
                    in medium conditioned by teratocarcinoma stem cells,” Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 1981.
                    78(12): p. 7634–8.
                11. Thomson, J.A., et al., “Embryonic stem cell lines derived from human blastocysts,”
                    Science, 1998. 282(5391): p. 1145–7.
                12. Wilmut, I., et al., “Viable offspring derived from fetal and adult mammalian cells,” Na-
                    ture, 1997. 385(6619): p. 810–3.
                13. Tada, M., et al., “Nuclear reprogramming of somatic cells by in vitro hybridization
                    with ES cells,” Curr Biol, 2001. 11(19): p. 1553–8.
                14. Schneuwly, S., R. Klemenz, and W.J. Gehring, “Redesigning the body plan of Dro-
                    sophila by ectopic expression of the homoeotic gene Antennapedia,” Nature, 1987.
                    325(6107): p. 816–8.
                15. Davis, R.L., H. Weintraub, and A.B. Lassar, “Expression of a single transfected cDNA
                    converts fibroblasts to myoblasts,” Cell, 1987. 51(6): p. 987–1000.
                16. Kawai, J., et al., “Functional annotation of a full-length mouse cDNA collection,” Na-
                    ture, 2001. 409(6821): p. 685–90.
                17. “Digital Differential Display,” http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/UniGene/ddd.cgi
                18. Nichols, J., et al., “Formation of pluripotent stem cells in the mammalian embryo
                    depends on the POU transcription factor Oct4,” Cell, 1998. 95(3): p. 379–91.
                19. Niwa, H., J. Miyazaki, and A.G. Smith, “Quantitative expression of Oct-3/4 defines dif-
                    ferentiation, dedifferentiation or self-renewal of ES cells” Nat Genet, 2000. 24(4): p.
                    372–6.
                20. Okuda, A., et al., “UTF1, a novel transcriptional coactivator expressed in pluripotent
                    embryonic stem cells and extra-embryonic cells,” Embo J, 1998. 17(7): p. 2019–32.
                21. Rogers, M.B., B.A. Hosler, and L.J. Gudas, “Specific expression of a retinoic acid-reg-
                    ulated, zinc-finger gene, Rex-1, in preimplantation embryos, trophoblast and sper-
                    matocytes,” Development, 1991. 113(3): p. 815–24.
                22. Tokuzawa, Y., et al., “Fbx15 is a novel target of Oct3/4 but is dispensable for embry-
                    onic stem cell self-renewal and mouse development,” Mol Cell Biol, 2003. 23(8): p.
                    2699–708.
                23. Takahashi, K., K. Mitsui, and S. Yamanaka, “Role of ERas in promoting tumour-like
                    properties in mouse embryonic stem cells,” Nature, 2003. 423(6939): p. 541–5.
                24. Mitsui, K., et al., “The Homeoprotein Nanog Is Required for Maintenance of Pluripo-
                    tency in Mouse Epiblast and ES Cells,” Cell, 2003. 113(5): p. 631–42.




Book.indb 283                                                                                              3/24/14 12:59 PM


        284                                                                      The Nobel Prizes


        25. Masui, S., et al., “Pluripotency governed by Sox2 via regulation of Oct3/4 expression
            in mouse embryonic stem cells,” Nat Cell Biol, 2007. 9(6): p. 625–635.
        26. Chambers, I., et al., “Functional expression cloning of nanog, a pluripotency sustain-
            ing factor in embryonic stem cells,” Cell, 2003. 113(5): p. 643–55.
        27. Yuan, H., et al., “Developmental-specific activity of the FGF-4 enhancer requires the
            synergistic action of Sox2 and Oct-3,” Genes Dev, 1995. 9(21): p. 2635–45.
        28. Okita, K., T. Ichisaka, and S. Yamanaka, “Generation of germ-line competent induced
            pluripotent stem cells,” Nature, 2007. 448: p. 313–7.
        29. Egawa, N., et al., “Drug screening for ALS using patient-specific induced pluripotent
            stem cells,” Sci Transl Med, 2012. 4(145): p. 145ra104.
        30. Yahata, N., et al., “Anti-Abeta Drug Screening Platform Using Human iPS Cell-De-
            rived Neurons for the Treatment of Alzheimer’s Disease,” PLoS One, 2011. 6(9): p.
            e25788.
        31. Tanaka, T., et al., “Induced pluripotent stem cells from CINCA syndrome patients as
            a model for dissecting somatic mosaicism and drug discovery,” Blood, 2012. 120(6):
            p. 1299–308.
        32. Takayama, N., et al., “Transient activation of c-MYC expression is critical for efficient
            platelet generation from human induced pluripotent stem cells,” J Exp Med, 2010.
        33. Okita, K., et al., “A more efficient method to generate integration-free human iPS
            cells,” Nat Methods, 2011. 8(5): p. 409–12.
        34. Hong, H., et al., “Suppression of induced pluripotent stem cell generation by the
            p53-p21 pathway,” Nature, 2009. 460(7259): p. 1132–5.
        35. Nakagawa, M., et al., “Promotion of direct reprogramming by transformation-defi-
            cient Myc,” Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 2010. 107(32): p. 14152–7.
        36. Maekawa, M., et al., “Direct reprogramming of somatic cells is promoted by maternal
            transcription factor Glis1,” Nature, 2011. 474(7350): p. 225–9.
        37. Smith, A.G., et al., “Inhibition of pluripotential embryonic stem cell differentiation by
            purified polypeptides,” Nature, 1988. 336(6200): p. 688–90.
        38. Avilion, A.A., et al., “Multipotent cell lineages in early mouse development depend
            on SOX2 function,” Genes Dev, 2003. 17(1): p. 126–40.
        39. Hanna, J., et al., “Treatment of Sickle Cell Anemia Mouse Model with iPS Cells Gener-
            ated from Autologous Skin,” Science, 2007. 318(5858): p. 1920–3.
        40. Park, I.H., et al., “Disease-Specific Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells,” Cell, 2008. 134(5):
            p. 877–886.
        41. Dimos, J.T., et al., “Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells Generated from Patients with ALS
            Can Be Differentiated into Motor Neurons,” Science, 2008. 321: p. 1218–1221.
        42. Jang, J., et al., “Induced pluripotent stem cell models from X-linked adrenoleukodys-
            trophy patients,” Ann Neurol, 2011. 70(3): p. 402–9.
        43. Agarwal, S. and G.Q. Daley, “Telomere dynamics in dyskeratosis congenita: the long
            and the short of iPS,” Cell Res, 2011. 21(8): p. 1157–60.
        44. Urbach, A., et al., “Differential modeling of fragile X syndrome by human embryonic
            stem cells and induced pluripotent stem cells,” Cell Stem Cell, 2010. 6(5): p. 407–11.
        45. Guan, X., et al., “Derivation of human embryonic stem cells with NEMO deficiency,”
            Stem Cell Res, 2012.




Book.indb 284                                                                                            3/24/14 12:59 PM


                The Winding Road to Pluripotency                                                   285


                46. Zhou, Q., et al., “In vivo reprogramming of adult pancreatic exocrine cells to beta-
                    cells,” Nature, 2008. 455(7213): p. 627–632.
                47. Qian, L., et al., “In vivo reprogramming of murine cardiac fibroblasts into induced
                    cardiomyocytes,” Nature, 2012. 485(7400): p. 593–8.

                Portrait photo of Shinya Yamanaka by photographer Ulla Montan.




Book.indb 285                                                                                          3/24/14 12:59 PM
