74

PRIONS
Nobel Lecture, December 8, 1997
by
STANLEY B.   PRUSINER

Departments of Neurology and  of Biochemistry and  Biophysics, University of California, San 
Francisco, California 94103-0518, USA


ABSTRACT
Prions are  unprecedented  infectious pathogens  that cause a group of invari- ably fatal 
neurodegenerative diseases by an entirely  novel mechanism.  Prion diseases may present as genetic, 
infectious, or sporadic disorders, all of which involve  modification   of  the  prion  protein   
(PrP) .  Bovine  spongiform   en- cephalopathy  (BSE) , scrapie of sheep, and Creutzfeldt-Jakob 
disease  (CJD) of humans are among the most notable prion diseases. Prions are transmissible 
particles that are devoid of nucleic acid and  seem  to be composed  exclusive- ly of a modified 
protein  (PrPSc). The normal, cellular PrP (PrP")  is converted into PrPSᶜ through a 
posttranslational process during which it acquires a high
§-sheet content. The species of a particular  prion is encoded by the  sequence of  the chromosomal 
 PrP gene of the  mammals in which it last replicated.  In contrast  to pathogens carrying a 
nucleic acid genome,  prions appear  to en- cipher  strain-specific  properties  in  the   tertiary 
 structure  of  PrPSc.  Trans- genetic  studies  argue  that  PrPSc  acts  as  a  template  upon  
which  PrP'  is  re- folded into a nascent PrPS° molecule through a process facilitated  by another 
protein.  Miniprions  generated  in  transgenic  mice  expressing  PrP,  in  which nearly half of 
the  residues were deleted, exhibit unique biological  properties and  should  facilitate  
structural  studies  of  PrPSᶜ.  While  knowledge   about prions has profound implications for 
studies of the structural plasticity of pro- teins, investigations of  prion  diseases suggest  
that new strategies for  the  pre- vention  and  treatment  of  these  disorders  may  also  find  
application  in  the more common degenerative  diseases.

The  tortuous  path of the  scientific investigation  that led to an understanding of familial 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease  (CJD)  chronicles a remarkable  scientific odyssey.  By 1930,  the high  
incidence  of familial  (9  CJD in some families was known  '  *. Almost 60 years were to pass 
before the significance of this finding could be appreciated    ⁵. CJD remained a curious, rare 
neurodegenerative di- sease of unknown etiology throughout this period of three score years ⁶. Only 
with transmission  of disease to apes following inoculation  of brain extracts pre- pared from 
patients, who died of CJD, did the story begin  to unravel
Once CJD was shown  to be an  infectious disease,  relatively little attention was paid to the 
familial form of the  disease since most cases were not found in

Stand  B.  Prusinei

families. It is interesting  to speculate  how the course of scientific investigation might  have  
proceeded  had  transmission  studies  not  been  performed  until after the molecular genetic 
lesion had been  identified.  Had that sequence  of events  transpired,   then   the  prion   
concept,  which   readily  explains  how  a single  disease  can  have  a  genetic  or  infectious  
etiology,  might  have  been greeted with  much less skepticism
Epidemiologic  studies designed  to identify the source of the CJD infection were unable to 
identify any predisposing  risk factors although some geographic clusters  were  found  '‘’".  
Libyan  Jews  living  in  Israel  developed  CJD  about 30 times more frequently than other 
Israelis  '".  This finding prompted  some investigators  to  propose  that  the  Libyan Jews  had  
contracted  CJD  by  eating lightly  cooked  brain  from  scrapie-infected sheep  when  they  lived 
 in  Tripoli prior  to emigration.  Subsequently,  the Libyan Jewish  patients were all found to 
carry a mutation  at codon  200 in their prion  protein  (PrP)  gene  ¹    ¹⁶
My own interest in the subject began with  a patient dying of    JD in the fall
of 1572. At that time, I was beginning  a residency in Neurology and was most impressed  by a 
disease  process  that  could  kill  my  patient  in  two  months  by destroying  her brain while 
her body remained unaffected by this process. No febrile  response,  no  leucocytosis  or  
pleocytosis,   no  humoral   immune   re- sponse, and yet I was told  that she was infected with a 
“slow virus.“
Slow viruses.  The  term  “slow virus“ had  been  coined  by Bjorn  Sigurdsson in  1954 while he 
was working in Iceland on scrapie and visna of sheep '  . Five years later, William Hadlow had 
suggested  that kuru, a disease of New Guinea highlanders, was similar to scrapie and thus, it, 
too, was caused by a slow virus '8. Seven  more years were  to pass before  the  transmissibility 
of kuru was esta- blished by passaging the disease to chimpanzees inoculated intracerebrally ” Just 
as Hadlow had made  the intellectual leap between scrapie and kuru, Igor Klatzo  made  a  similar  
connection   between   kuru  and  CJD  ²’.  In  both  in- stances,  these  neuropathologists were  
struck  by  the  similarities  in  light  mi- croscopic  pathology  of  the  CNS  that kuru  
exhibited  with  scrapie  or CJD.  In 1968, the transmission  of CJD to chimpanzees after 
intracerebral  inoculation was reported 7.
In  scrapie,  kuru,  CJD,  and  all  of  the  other  disorders  now  referred  to  as prion  
diseases  (Table  1) ,  spongiform  degeneration  and  astrocytic  gliosis  is found upon  
microscopic  examination  of  the  CNS  (Figure  1)  21. The degree of  spongiform  degeneration   
is  quite  variable  while  the  extent  of  reactive gliosis correlates with  the degree  of 
neuron  loss **
Prio      a brief  overview.  Before  proceeding  with  a detailed  discussion  of our  current  
understanding  of  prions  causing  scrapie  and  CJD,  I  provide  a brief overview  of  prion  
biology.  Prions are  unprecedented  infectious  patho- gens that cause a group of invariably fatal 
neurodegenerative diseases media- ted by an entirely novel mechanism. Prion diseases may present as 
genetic, in- fectious, or sporadic disorders,  all of which  involve  modification  of the prion 
protein  (PrP) , a constituent of normal mammalian  cells "3. CJD generally pre- sents as 
progressive  dementia while  scrapie  of sheep and bovine  spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) are 
generally manifest as ataxic illnesses  (Table  1)  ²⁴

Y6                                   Plqsiolo   y  or  Medicine  1997



Disease                       Host
A      Kuru                           Fore people Iatrogenic CJD*        Humans
Mechanism  of Pathogenesis
Infection  through  ritualisuc cannibalism Infecfion   from   prion-contaminated   HGH, dura mater 
grafts, etc.

Variant CAD Familial CQ GSS
yFl
Humans Humans Humans Humans
Infecuon  from  bovine prions? Germ line mutations in PrP gene Gerrnline  mutauons in PrP gene
Gcrmline   mutation   in   PrP  gene   (D l78N,
Ml29)

Sporadic CjD            Humans
Somatic mutation or spontaneous conversion of PrPC  into Pri?

FSC

B.     Scrapie BSE TME CWD FSE
Humans

Sheep Gattle Mink
Mule deer. eIk Cats
Somatic  mutation  or spontaneous conversion of PrP” into Pri*
Infection  in genetically susceptible sheep Infection with prion-contaminated MBM Infection with 
prions from sheep or cattle Unknown
Infection with prion-contaminated bovine tis- sues or MBM

exotic ungulate        Greater kudu,
encephalopathy         njrata, onyx
‘Abbreviauons  defined in  Foomote a.
Infection u'ith prion-contaminated VBM























Figure 1. Neuropathologic changes in Swiss mice following inoculation with RML scrapie prions.
(A) Hematoxylin  and eosin stain of a seriai section of the hippocampus shows spongiform dege- 
neration of the neuropil, with vacuoles  10—30 pm in diameter. Brain tissue was immersion  fixed in 
 l0R   buffered formalin  soluoon after sacrificing  the animals and embedded in paraffin. (B) GFAP 
immunohistochemistry of a eerial Section of the hippocampus shows numerous reactive as• troeytes.  
Bar in  B  = 50  jam and also  applies  to A. Phocomicrographs prepared  by Stephen j. DeArmond.

Stanley B.  Prusiner                                               77

Prions are devoid of nucleic acid and seem to be composed exclusively of a modified  isoform  of  
PrP  designated  PrPSc.'a’  The  normal,  cellular  PrP,  de- noted PrPC, is converted into PrPSc  
through a process whereby a portion of its O-helical  and coil structure  is refolded  into  
Q-sheet  *5. This structural  transi- tion is accompanied  by profound changes in the 
physicochemical properties of the PrP. The amino acid sequence of PrPS° corresponds to that encoded 
by the PrP gene of the mammalian  host in which it last replicated. In contrast to pathogens with  
a nucleic  acid genome  that encode strain-specific properties in  genes,  prions  encipher  these  
properties  in  the  tertiary structure  of PrPSc
*’.  Transgenetic  studies  argue  that  PrPS    acts  as  a  template  upon  which
PrPC  is refolded  into a nascent  PrPSc  molecule  through  a process facilitated by another 
protein.
More  than  20  mutations  of  the  PrP  gene  are  now  known  to  cause  the  in- herited human  
prion diseases and significant genetic linkage has been estab- lished for five of  these mutations 
4  ’6' 2    3*. The prion concept readily explains how a disease can be manifest as a heritable as 
well as an infectious illness.
Resistance  of  scrapie  agent  to radiation.  My fascination  with  CJD  quickly shifted  to 
scrapie once I learned of the remarkable  radiobiological data that Tikvah Alper and her colleagues 
had collected on the scrapie agent 32*34. The scrapie agent had been found to be extremely 
resistant  to inactivation  by UV and ionizing  radiation  as was later shown  for the CJD agent  
35. It seemed  to me  that the  most intriguing  question  was  the chemical  nature of the scrapie 
agent; Alper's  data had evoked  a torrent of hypotheses  concerning  its com- position. 
Suggestions as to the nature of the scrapie agent ranged from small DNA viruses  to membrane  
fragments  to polysaccharides to proteins,  the last of which  eventually proved  to be correct 3   
   2
Scrapie of sheep and goats possesses a history no less fascinating  than  that of  CJD.  The  
resistance  of  the  scrapie  agent  to  inactivation  by formalin  and heat treatments 43, which 
were commonly used to produce vaccines against vi- ral illnesses, suggested  that the scrapie agent 
might be different from viruses, but it came  at  a time  before  the  structure  of  viruses  was  
understood.  Later, this resistance was dismissed as an interesting  observation  but of little 
impor- tance since some viruses can survive  such  treatments;  indeed,  this was not an 
unreasonable  viewpoint.  More  than  two decades were  to pass  before  reports of  the  extreme  
resistance  of  the  scrapie  agent  to  inactivation  by  radiation again  trumpeted  the novelty 
of this infectious pathogen. Interestingly, British scientists  had argued for many years about 
whether natural  scrapie was a ge-
netic  or  an  infectious  disease  4      6.  Scrapie,  like  kuru  and  CJD,  produced

• Prions are  defined  as proteinaceous infectious  particles  that lack nucleic acid. PrP^ is the 
cel- lular prion protein; PrPSr I’S the pathologic isoform. NH₂-terminal  truncation  during 
limited pro- teolysis of PrPS° produces PrP 27-30. BSE,  bovine spongiform  encephalopathy; CJD, 
Creutzfeldt- Jakob disease; sCJD, sporadic CJD; fCJD, familial CJD; iCJD, iatrogenic CJD; vCJD,  
(new) variant CAD;  CWD, chronic wasting disease;  FFI, fatal familial  insomnia;  FSE, feline 
spongiform  encep- halopathy; FSI, fatal sporadic insomnia; GSS, Gerstmann-Straussler-Scheinker 
disease; HGH, hu- man  growth  hormone;  MBM,  meat and bone meal;  SHa,  Syrian  hamster;  Tg,  
transgenic;  TME, transmissible  mink encephalopathy; wt, wild-type.

78                  Physiology or  Medicine  199'7

death  of  the  host without  any sign  of an  immune  response  to a “foreign  in- fectious 
agent.”
My initial studies focused on the sedimentation  properties of scrapie infec- tivity in  mouse  
spleens and  brains.  Fr,om  these studies,  I concluded  that  hy- drophobic  interactions were  
responsible for the non-ideal  physical  behavior of the scrapie particle 4’' ’8. Indeed,  the 
scrapie agent presented a biochemi- cal nightmare:  infectivity was spread from one end to the 
other of a sucrose gradient and from  the void volume  to fractions  eluting  at 5—10 times  the 
in- cluded volume of chromatographic columns. Such results demanded new ap- proaches and better 
assays ”.
Bioassays. As the number of hypotheses about the molecular nature of the scrapie  agent  began  to  
exceed  the  number  of laboratories  working  on  this problem,  the need for new experimental  
approaches  became evident. Much of the available data on the properties of the scrapie agent had 
been gathered on  brain  homogenates  prepared  from  mice  with  clinical  signs  of  scrapie. 
These  mice  had been  inoculated  4-5  months  earlier with  the scrapie  agent which  originated  
in  sheep  but  had  been  passaged  multiple  times  in  mice. Once an experiment was completed on 
these homogenates,  an additional  12 months  was  required  using  an  endpoint  titration  in  
mice  50. Typically,  60 mice were  required  to determine  the  titer of a single  sample.  This 
slow,  te- dious, and expensive  system discouraged systematic  investigation.
Although  the transmission  of scrapie  to mice had ushered in a new era of research,  the  1.5—2  
year  intervals  between  designing  experiments  and  ob- taining results discouraged sequential 
studies. Infrequently,  the results of one set of experiments were  used as a foundation  for the 
next and so on. More- over,  the large number of mice needed  to measure  the infectivity in a 
single sample prevented studies where many experiments were performed in paral- lel. These problems 
encouraged publication of inconclusive experimental  re- sults.
In  1972, when  I became  fascinated  by the enigmatic  nature of the scrapie agent,  I  thought  
that  the  most  direct  path  to  determining  the  molecular structure of the scrapie agent was 
purification. Fortunately,  I did not appreci- ate  the  magnitude  of that task although  I had 
considerable  experience  and training in the purification  of enzymes  5'. While many studies  had 
been  per- formed  to probe  the physicochemical nature of  the scrapie  agent using  the mouse  
endpoint  titration  system,  few systematic  investigations had been  per- formed on  the 
fundamental  characteristics of the infectious  scrapie particle 4*. In  fact,  12 years after 
introduction  of the mouse  bioassay,  there were  few data on the sedimentation  behavior of the 
scrapie particle. Since differential centrifugation  is frequently  a useful  initial  step  in  
the  purification  of many macromolecules,  some  knowledge  of  the  sedimentation  properties  of 
 the scrapie agent under defined conditions seemed mandatory. To perform such studies,  Swiss mice 
were inoculated intracerebrally with  the Chandler isolate of scrapie  prions and  the  mice  
sacrificed  about  30 and  150 days  later when the titers in their spleens and brains, 
respectively, were expected to be at max- imal levels. The two tissues were homogenized,  extracted 
with detergent, and

Stanley B.  Prusiner                                               79

centrifuged  for increasing  times and speeds ⁴’' ⁵2. The  disappearance  of scra- pie  infectivity 
 was  measured  in  supernatant  fractions  by endpoint  titration which required one year to 
score.
Incubation  Anne essays in hamsters.  In view of  these daunting  logistical  prob- lems,  the 
identification of an  inoculum  that produced scrapie  in the golden Syrian  hamster  in  -70   
days  after  intracerebral  inoculation  proved  to  be  an important advance 5’' 5’ once an 
incubation  time assay was developed  S⁵, S‘.  In earlier studies,  Syrian  hamsters  (SHa)  had  
been  inoculated  with  prions,  but serial passage with  short incubation  times was not reported 
5’.  Development of the incubation  time bioassay reduced the time required to measure prions in 
samples with  high  titers by a factor of five: only 70 days were  required  in- stead of  the 360 
days previously  needed. Equally important,  4 animals could be used in place of the 60 that were 
required for endpoint titrations, making possible a large number of parallel experiments.  With  
this bioassay,  research on  the  nature  of  the  scrapie  agent  was  accelerated  nearly  
100-fold  and  the hamster with high prion  titers in its brain became the experimental animal of 
choice for biochemical studies.
The  incubation  time  assay enabled  development  of  effective  purification schemes for 
enriching fractions for scrapie infectivity. It  provided a means to assess  quantitatively  those  
fractions  that  were  enriched  for  infectivity  and those  that were  not. Such  studies led 
rather rapidly to the development  of a protocol  for  separating  scrapie  infectivity  from  most 
 proteins  and  nucleic acids. With  a -100-fold purification  of infectivity relative  to protein, 
>989o  of the  proteins  and  polynucleotides were  eliminated  permitting  more  reliable probing 
of the constituents  of these enriched fractions.
The prion  concept. As reproducible  data began  to accumulate  indicating that scrapie infectivity 
could be reduced by procedures that hydrolyze or  mo- dify proteins  but was resistant to 
procedures that alter nucleic acids, a family of hypotheses about the molecular architecture of the 
scrapie agent began to emerge  58. These data established,  for the first time, that a particular 
macro- molecule was required for infectivity and that this macromolecule  was a pro- tein. The 
experimental  findings extended earlier observations on resistance of scrapie infectivity  to UV 
irradiation  at 250 nm"    in that the four different procedures used to probe for a nucleic acid 
are based on  physical  principles that are independent of UV radiation damage.
Once  the requirement of protein  for infectivity was established,  I thought that it was 
appropriate  to give the infectious pathogen  of scrapie a provisional name that would distinguish  
it from both viruses and viroids. After some con- templation,  I suggested  the term  “prion" 
derived from proteinaceous and in- fectious 58. At that time, I defined prions as proteinaceous 
infectious particles that resist inactivation  by procedures that modify nucleic acids. I never 
imag- ined  the  irate  reaction  of  some  scientists  to  the  word  prion — it  was  truly 
remarkable!
Current definiâons. Perhaps, the best current working definition of a prion is a proteinaceous 
infectious particle that lacks nucleic acid *8. Because a wealth of data supports the contention  
that scrapie prions are composed entirely of

80                  Physiology or Medicine  1997

a protein that adopts an abnormal conformation, it is not  unreasonable  to de- fine  prions as 
infectious  proteins *5   *’ 5" 60. But I hasten  to add  that we still cannot eliminate  a small 
ligand bound  to PrPSᶜ as an essential component of the infectious prion particle. Learning how to 
renature PrPSᶜ accompanied by restoration  of prion infectivity or  to generate  de novo  prion 
infectivity  using a synthetic  polypeptide  should  help  address  this  as yet  unresolved  issue 
 6’. From a broader perspective,  prions are elements  that impart and  propagate conformational 
variability.
Although  PrPS° is  the  only  known component  of  the  infectious  prion  par- ticles,  these  
unique  pathogens share several  phenotypic  traits with other  in- fectious entities such as 
viruses. Because some features of the  diseases caused by prions and viruses are  similar, some 
scientists have difficulty accepting the existence of prions despite a wealth of scientific data 
supporting  this concept
62—67
Families  of hypotheses.  Once the requirement for a protein was established, it was possible  to 
revisit the long list of hypothetical  structures  that had been proposed  for  the  scrapie  agent 
 and  to  eliminate  carbohydrates,  lipids,  and nucleic  acids as the infective  elements within  
a scrapie  agent devoid of pro- tein  58. No longer could structures  such  as a viroid-like  
nucleic acid, a repli- cating  polysaccharide,  or  a  small  polynucleotide  surrounded  by  a  
carbo- hydrate   be  entertained  as  reasonable  candidates   to  explain   the  puzzling 
properties of the scrapie agent 5'' 6'.
The family of hypotheses that remained after identifying a protein  compo- nent was still large and 
required a continued consideration  of all possibilities in which a protein was a critical element 
49. The prion concept evolved from a family of hypotheses in which an infectious  protein was only 
one of several possibilities. With  the accumulation  of experimental  data on  the  molecular 
properties of the prion, it became  possible  to discard an increasing  number of hypothetical 
structures.  In prion  research, as in many other areas of scien- tific investigation, a single  
hypothesis  is all  too often  championed  at the ex- pense  of a reasoned  approach  which  
requires  entertaining  a series  of com- plex arguments  until  one or more  can  be discarded  on 
 the  basis  of experi-
mental data ⁶’
Genes and DNA. In some respects,  the early development  of the prion con- cept mirrors  the  story 
of DNA      ’*. Prior  to the acceptance  of DNA as  the genetic  material of life ’3' ”,  many 
scientists  asserted  that the DNA prepara- tions must be contaminated with protein which is the 
true genetic material 7’ The  prejudices  of these  scientists  were  similar  in  some  ways  to  
those  of in- vestigators  who  have  disputed  the  prion  concept.  But  the  scientists  who  
at- tacked  the hypothesis  that genes are composed of DNA had no well proven alternative;  they 
had only a set of feelings derived from poorly substantiated data sets that genes are made of 
protein. In contrast,  those who attacked the hypothesis that the prion is composed only of protein 
had more than 30 years of cumulative evidence showing  that genetic information  in all organisms 
on our planet  is encoded  in  DNA and that biological  diversity  resides  in  DNA. Studies of 
viruses and eventually viroids extended this concept to these small

Stanley B.  Prusiner                                               81

infectious  pathogens  '6  and  showed  that genes  could  also  be  composed  of
RNA   $, 78
Discovery of  the Prion Protein.  The  discovery  of the  prion  protein  trans- formed research  
on scrapie and related diseases ”  '0. Itprovided a molecular marker that was subsequently  shown  
to be specific for these illnesses as well as the major, and very likely the only, constituent of 
the infectious  prion.
PrP 27—30 was discovered by enriching fractions from SHa brain for scrapie infectivity 7’' '0. This 
protein  is the protease-resistant core of PrPSc  and has an apparent  molecular  weight  (M,)  of  
27—30  kD  8*' ".   Although  resistance  to limited  proteolysis  proved  to  be  a  convenient  
tool  for  many  but  not all  stu- dies, use of proteases to enrich fractions for scrapie 
infectivity created a prob- lem when  the NHS-terminal  sequence  of PrP  27-30 was determined  ".  
 The ragged  NH₂-terminus   of  PrP  27—30  yielded  three  sets  of  signals  in  almost every 
cycle of the Edman degradation.  Only once these signals were properly interpreted   and  placed  
in  correct  register  could  a  unique  sequence   be assigned  for  the  NHS-terminus  of  PrP  
27—30.  The  determination  of  amino acid sequence of the NHS-terminus of PrP 27—30 made 
subsequent molecular cloning studies of the PrP gene possible '3' 84.
The  finding  that PrP mRNA  levels were similar in  normal uninfected  and scrapie-infected 
tissues caused some investigators to argue that PrP 27—30 was not  related  to  the  infectious  
prion  particle  83. An  alternate  interpretation prompted a search for a prion protein in 
uninfected animals which was found to be protease sensitive and soluble in non-denaturing 
detergents,  unlike PrP 27—30.  This  isoform  was  designated  PrP*  (Figure  2)  '4   '*. Deduced 
 amino acid  sequences  from  PrP  cDNA  as well  as  immunoblotting studies  revealed that PrP 
27-30 was NHS-terminally truncated  and was derived  from a larger molecule, designated  PrPSc, 
that was unique to infected animals ⁸¹ '2' ⁸  '⁶.
With the  discovery of PrP 27—30 and   the   production of antiserum '⁷, brains from humans and 
animals with putative prion diseases were examined for the presence of this protein. In each case, 
PrP 27—30 was found and it was absent in  other  neurodegenerative  disorders  such  as  
Alzheimer's  disease,  Parkin- son's disease, and  amyotrophic  lateral sclerosis ⁸   ’¹. The 
extreme specificity of PrPSᶜ for prion disease is an important feature of the  protein and is 
consis- tent with  the  postulated  role of PrPS° in both  the  transmission  and  pathoge- nesis 
of these illnesses  (Table 2) ”.
The  accumulation  of  PrPSc  contrasts  markedly with  that of glial fibrillary
acid  protein  (GFAP)  in  prion  disease. In  scrapie,  GFAP  mRNA and  protein levels rise as the 
 disease progresses ’³ but the accumulation of GFAP is neither specific nor  necessary for either 
the transmission  or  pathogenesis  of disease. Mice deficient for GFAP show no  alteration in 
their incubation  times ⁹⁴ ”.
Except for  PrPS°, no  macromolecule  has been found  in  tissues of patients dying  of  the  prion 
 diseases  that  is  specific  for  these  encephalopathies.  In searches for a scrapie-specific 
nucleic acid, cDNAs have been identified  that are  complementary  to  mRNAs  encoding  other  
proteins  with  increased  ex- pression in prion disease 9    98. Yet, none of the proteins has 
been found to be specific for  prion disease.

82                                       Physiolo      or MediNne  1997


















PrP Polypeptide




Prps*

PrP  27-30

Codon

1        23    50             94           131              188           231    254
Figure 2. Prion protein isoforms. (A} Western immunoblot of brain homogenates from uninfect-
ed (lanes 1 and 2) and prion-infected (lanes S and 4} Syrian  hamsters. Samples in lanes £ and 4
were digested with 50 pg/ml of proteinase K for 50 min at     oc.  Pri    in lanes Z and 4 was com-
pletely hydrolyzed under thexe conditions, whereas approximately 67 amino acids were digested from 
the NHS-terminus of Pri    to generate PrP 27-90. After polyacrylamide gel electmphoresis (PAGE)  
and electrotransfer, the blot was developed with anti-PrP R073 polyclonal rabbit antise- rum. 
Molecular size markers are in kilodaltons (kD). {B) Bar diagram o£ SHaPrP which consists of 254 
amino acids. After processing of the NHS  and GOOH- termini, both Pri    and Pri     con- sist of 
209 residues. After limited proteolysis, the FfH  -terminus of Pri     is truncated to form PrP 
27—30, which  is composed of approximately  148 amino acids.

Stanley B.  Prusiner                                                 83

Table  2. Arguments  for prions being composed largely,  if not entirely,  of Pri     molecules and 
devoid of nucleic acid.
1.  PrP“ and scrapie infectivity copurify using biochemical  and immunologic procedures.
2.  The unusual properties of PrP“ mimic those of prions. Many different procedures that modify or 
hydrolyze  PrP    inactivate prions.
3    Levels of PrPS° are directly proportional  to prion  titers. Non-denatured  PrP    has not 
been separated from scrapie infectivity.
4.  No evidence for a virus-like  particle or a nucleic acid genome.
5.   Accumulation  of  PrP“ invariably  associated  with  the  pathology  of prion  diseases  in- 
cluding PrP amyloid plaques that are pathognomonic.
6.  PrP gene mutations are genetically linked to inherited prion disease and cause forma- tion of 
PrPSc.
7.  Overexpression of PrPC increases  the  rate  of PrP    formation,  which  shortens  the  in-
cubation  time. Knock out of the PrP gene eliminates  the substrate  necessary for PrPS' formation 
and prevents both prion disease and prion  replication.
8.   Species variations in the PrP sequence are responsible,  at least in part, for the species 
barrier which is found when prions are passaged from one host to another.
9.  PrP    preferentially binds to homologous  PrP* resulting in formation  of nascent PrP and 
prion  infectivity.
10.  Chimeric and partially deleted PrP genes change susceptibility to prions from different 
species and support  production  of artificial  prions with  novel properties  that are  not found 
in nature.
11.   Prion  diversity  is enciphered within  the  conformation  of PrP“.  Strains  can  be gener- 
ated by passage through hosts with different PrP genes. Prion strains are maintained by PrP*/PrP“ 
interactions.
12.   Human  prions from fCJD(E200K)  and FFI patients impart different properties to chi- meric 
MHu2M  PrP in  transgenic  mice, which provides a mechanism  for strain  propa- gation.

Attempts  to  falsify  the prion  hypothesis.  Numerous  attempts  to disprove the  prion  
hypothesis  over  the  past  15  years  have  failed.  Such  studies  have tried unsuccessfully to 
separate scrapie infectivity from protein and more spe- cifically from  PrPSc. No preparations  of  
purified  prions  containing  less  than one PrP    molecule per ID₅₀ unit have been reported ”  
and no replication of prions in PrP deficient  (Prnp0’0)  mice was found  ¹0    104.
Copurification of PrP  27—30 and scrapie  infectivity demands  that the phy- sicochemical  
properties as well as antigenicity of these two entities be similar
105   (Table 2). The results of  a wide array of inactivation  experiments demon-
strated the similarities in the properties of PrP 27—30 and scrapie infectivity ⁶¹
10    "’.   To explain  these findings  in  terms of  the virus hypothesis,  it is neces- sary to 
postulate  either a virus  that has a coat protein  which  is highly homo- logous with  PrP or a 
virus  that binds  tightly to PrPSc. In either case,  the PrP- like  coat  protein  or  the  
PrPS°/virus  complex  must  display  properties  in- distinguishable from PrPSc  alone. With each 
species that the putative virus in- vades, it must incorporate  a new PrP sequence during 
replication.
Search  for  a  scrapie-speNfic nucleic  aNd.  The  inability  to  inactivate  prepara- tions 
highly enriched for scrapie infectivity by procedures that modify nucleic acids militates against 
the existence of a scrapie-specific nucleic acid '⁸ '’⁰'''' To explain the findings in terms of a 
virus, one must argue that PrPSᶜ or an as yet undetected PrP-like protein of viral origin protects 
the viral genome from

84                                     Physiology  or Medics      1997

inactivation. The notion that the putative scrapie virus encodes a PrP-like pre tein  was  refuted  
by  nucleic  acid  hybridization   studies  using  a  PrP  cDNA probe.  Less  than  0.002  nucleic  
acid  molecules  encoding  PrP  per  IDA  unit were found in purified preparations of SHa prions 
®*. To circumvent  this fin- ding, it could be hypothesized that the genetic code used by the PrP 
gene dif- fers so greatly from that found in the cell that a PrP cDNA probe failed to de- tect it 
in highly purified preparations.
If prions contained a genome with a unique genetic code, then  it is likely that this genome would 
encode some specialized  proteins required for repli- cation as well as some unique tRNAs. But both 
 UV and ionizing radiation  in- activation  studies as well as physical studies have eliminated the 
possibility of a large nucleic acid hiding within purified preparations of prions '     ''". Only 
oligonucleotides of fewer than 50 bases were found at a concentration  of one molecule  per IDJ₀ 
unit in prion  preparations  highly enriched  for scrapie  in- fectivity  '"   "4. These  small  
nucleic  acids  were  of  variable  length  and  are thought  to  be  degradation   byproducts  
generated   during  purification   of prions.  Failure  to  find  a  bona  fide  genome  was  
attributed  to  the  unusual properties of the putative viral nucleic acid or technical  
incompetence on the part of the investigators who were unable to find it    ' ''*.
PrP  Amyloid.  In  preparations  highly  enriched  for  scrapie  infectivity  and containing  only  
PrP  27—30  by silver staining  of gels after  SDS-PAGE,  nume- rous  rod-shaped  particles  were  
seen  by  electron  microscopy  after  negative staining (Figure 3)  ".   Each of the rods was 
slightly different, in contrast to vi- ruses  which  exhibit  extremely  uniform  structures     6. 
These  irre{,ular  rods

A









Figure  3. Electron  microgi aphs of negatively  stnined  and  immunogold-labeled prion  proteins:
(A) Pri    and (B) Pri°. Neither PrP* nor Pri     form recognizable, ordered  polymers. (C) Prion 
rods composed of PrP 27-SO were negatively stained. The prion  rods are indistinguishable from many 
purified amyloids. Bar = 100 nm.

Stanley B.  Prtcstner                                                 85

composed  largely,  if not entirely,  of PrP  27—30, were  indistinguishable mor- phologically from 
many other purified amyloids ’".   Studies of the prion rods with  Congo  red dye  demonstrated  
that  the  rods  also  fulfilled  the  tinctorial criteria for amyloid  ’0’ and immunostaining 
later showed that PrP is a major component  of amyloid plaques in some animals and humans with  
prion dis- ease '’    1*0. Subsequently,  it was recognized  that the prion  rods were  not re- 
quired  for scrapie  infectivity  1*';  furthermore,  the rods were shown  to be an artifact  of 
purification  during  which  limited  proteolysis  of PrPSc  generated PrP  27—30  that  
polymerized  spontaneously  in  the  presence  of  detergent (Figure  3)  ’2*
The idea that scrapie prions were  composed of an  amyloidogenic  protein was truly heretical when 
it was introduced 10’. Since the prevailing view at the time was that scrapie is caused by an 
atypical virus, many argued  that amyloid proteins are mammalian  polypeptides and not viral 
proteins!
Some  investigators  have  argued  that  the  prion  rods are  synonymous  with scrapie-associated 
fibrils '°    l’5  even  though  morphologic  and tinctorial fea- tures  of these  fibrils  clearly 
 differentiated  them  from  amyloid  and  as  such from  the  prion  rods '26  '2’.  The  
scrapie-associated  fibrils were  identified  by their unique  ultrastructure in which  two or four 
subfilaments  were  helically wound around each other ’°6 and were proposed  to represent the first 
exam- ple  of a filamentous  animal  virus  '2’.  After  the argument  for  a filamentous animal  
virus causing  scrapie  faded,  it was  hypothesized  that a virus induces the formation  of PrP 
amyloid in order  to explain  the accumulation  of PrPS’ in prion diseases ’29. Besides the lack of 
evidence for a virus of any shape, no compelling  data has been  offered in support of the idea 
that prion  diseases are caused by a filamentous bacterium  called a spiroplasma  ’30.
Sean:h for the ubiquitous  “scrapie mms. ”When PrP gene mutations were dis- covered  to cause  
familial  prion  diseases  ’,  it was postulated  that PrPC  is a re- ceptor for the ubiquitous 
scrapie virus that binds more tightly to mutant than to wt PrPC '31. A similar hypothesis was 
proposed to explain why the length of the  scrapie  incubation  time  was  found  to  be  inversely 
 proportional  to  the level of PrP expression  in Tg mice and why Prnp0’0 mice are resistant to 
scra- pie I  *. The higher the level of PrP expression,  the faster the spread of the pu- tative 
virus which results in shorter incubation  times;  conversely,  mice defici- ent for PrP lack the 
receptor required for spread of the virus 63. The inability to find virus-like  particles in 
purified preparations  of PrPSc  was attributed  to these particles being hidden ''5  even though 
tobacco mosaic viruses could be detected when one virion was added per ID₅₀ unit of scrapie prions 
’*'
Recent   studies   on   the   transmission   of  mutant   prions   from   FFI   and fCJD (E200K)  
to Tg(MHu2M)  mice which results in the formation  of two dif- ferent PrPSc  molecules *’ has 
forced a corollary to the ubiquitous virus postu- late.  To  accommodate  this  result,  at least  
two  different  viruses  must  reside worldwide,  each  of which  binds  to a different  mutant  
HuPrPC  and  each  of which  induces a different  MHu2M  PrPSc  conformer when  transferred  to Tg 
mice.  Even  more  difficult  to imagine  is how one ubiquitous  virus  might ac- quire different 
mutant PrPS° molecules corresponding  to FFI or fCJD(E200K)

86                  Physiology  or  Medicine  1997

and  then  induce  different  MHu2M  PrP“ conformers  upon  transmission  to
Tg mice.
rtf         Joes. To explain  the production  of artificial  prions from chime- ric or mutant  PrP  
transgenes  in terms of a virus "      '3’,  mutated PrP“ mole- cules must be incorporated into the 
virus. In the case of mice expressing chi- meric  PrP  transgenes,  artificial  prions  are  
produced  with  host  ranges  not previously found in nature. Similarly, deleting specific regions 
of PrP resulted in the formation  of "miniprions" with  a unique  host range and neuropatho- logy 
as described  below.  The  production  of  artificial  prions  that were  gene- rated  by  
modifying  the  PrP  gene  sequence  and  exhibit  unique  biological properties is another 
compelling argument against the proposition  that scra- pie and CJD are caused by viruses.
ficism  oitce  ttieff               .  While  the  skepticism  about  prions  was  once 
well-justified and formed the basis for a vigorous scientific debate,  the wealth of  available  
data  now renders  such  arguments  moot.  In  summary,  no single hypothesis  involving  a  virus  
can  explain   the  findings  summarized   above (Table  2); instead, a series of ad hoc 
hypotheses, virtually all of which  can  be refuted by experimental data, must be constructed  to 
accommodate  a steadi- ly enlarging body of data.
It is notable  that the search  for an infectious pathogen  with  a nucleic acid genome  as  the 
cause  of  scrapie  and CJD  has done  little  to advance  our un- derstanding of these diseases. 
Instead, studies of PrP have created a wealth of data  that  now  explain  almost  every  aspect  
of  these  fascinating  disorders. While no single experiment can refute the existence of the 
"scrapie virus", all of  the data  taken  together  from  numerous  experimental  studies  present  
an impressive edifice which argues that the 50 year quest for a virus has failed be- cause it does 
not exist!
Prions defy rules of protein structure. Once cDNA probes for PrP became available,  the  PrP  gene  
was  found  to  be  constitutively  expressed  in  adult, uninfected  brain 83, 84. This finding 
eliminated  the possibility that PrPSc  stim- ulated production of more of itself by initiating 
transcription  of the PrP gene as proposed  nearly  two decades earlier ".   Determination  of the 
structure  of the PrP gene eliminated a second possible mechanism  that might explain  the 
appearance of PrP" in brains already synthesizing PrPC. Since the entire pro- tein coding region 
was contained within a single exon, there was no possibili- ty for the two PrP isoforms to be the 
products of alternatively spliced mRNAs '2.  Next,  a  posttranslational  chemical  modification  
that  distinguishes  PrP“ from PrPC was considered  but none was found in an exhaustive  study 5’  
and we  considered  it likely  that PrPC  and PrPSc  differed  only  in  their conforma- tion,  a  
hypothesis  also  proposed  earlier  3’.  However,  this  idea  was  no  less heretical than that 
of an infectious protein.
For more than 25 years, it had been widely accepted that the amino acid se- quence specifies one 
biologically active conformation  of a protein  '36. Yet, in scrapie we were faced with  the 
possibility  that one primary structure  for PrP might adopt at least two different conformations 
in order to explain the exis- tence of both PrPC  and PrPSc. When  the secondary  structures  of  
the PrP iso-

Stand  B.  Prusiner                                             87

forms  were  compared  by  optical  spectroscopy,  they were  found  to  be  mar- kedly different 
*5. Fourier transform  infrared  (FTIR)  and circular dichroism (CD)  studies showed  that PrPC  
contains about 40% n-helix and little  Q-sheet while  PrPSc   is  composed   of  about  30%  
O-helix  and  45%  Q-sheet  '5' '3'. Nevertheless,  these two proteins have  the same amino acid 
sequence!
Prior to comparative  studies on the structures of PrPC and PrPS°, we found by metabolic labeling 
studies that the acquisition  of PrPS° protease-resistance is a posttranslational process '3'.  In 
our quest for a chemical difference  that would distinguish PrPSc from PrPC, we found ethanolamine  
in hydrolysates of PrP  27—30  which  signalled  the  possibility  that PrP  might  contain  a 
glycosyl- phosphatidyl inositol  (GPI) anchor '3'.  Both PrP isoforms were found to car- ry GPI 
anchors and PrPC was found on the surface of cells where it could be released by cleavage of the 
anchor. Subsequent studies showed that PrPS° for- mation occurred after PrPC  reaches the cell 
surface 1’0  1”  and is localized to caveolae-like  domains"2*'45
ñfodéfing TY-P structures. Molecular modeling studies predicted that PrPC is a
four-helix bundle protein containing  four regions of secondary structure de- noted Hl,  H2,  H3, 
and H4  (Figure  4) '6'"7. Subsequent  NMR studies of a synthetic PrP peptide containing residues 
90—145 provided good evidence for H1 '48. This peptide contains the residues  11 Ml28 that are most 
highly con- served among all species studied  (Figure  4A)  '4’' 1”  '50 and correspond  to a 
transmembrane  region  of PrP  which  was delineated  in  cell-free  translation studies  l5* '5*. 
Recent studies show that a transmembrane  form of PrP accu- mulates in GSS caused by the A1I7V 
mutation and in Tg mice overexpressing either mutant or wtPrP '53. The paradoxical lack of evidence 
for an ct-helix in this region  from NMR studies of  recombinant  PrP in  aqueous  buffers  ¹⁵  "⁶ 
could be explained if the recombinant PrPs correspond to the secreted form of PrP that was also 
identified in cell-free translation  studies. This contention is supported by studies with 
recombinant antibody fragments (Fabs) showing the GPI-anchored  PrPC  on  the surface  of cells 
exhibits an  immunoreactivity similar  to that of recombinant  PrP  that was prepared with  an  
n-helical  con- formation  157.'58. GPI-anchored PrPC is synthesized within the secretory path- way 
and transported  to surface of the cell"    ' 15  .
Optical spectroscopic  measurements of PrPC provided the necessary back- ground for more detailed 
structural  studies 2’.  Unable  to produce  crystals of PrP, we and others utllized  NMR  to 
determine  the structure  of an  lx-helical form  of  a recombinant  PrP.  The  NMR  structure  of 
a COOH-terminal  frag- ment of MoPrP consisting of 111 residues showed three helices, two of which 
corresponded  to H3 and H4 in the PrPC model, and two small Q-strands each consisting  of three  
residues "4. How  the  structure  of this  MoPrP(121—231) fragment differs from PrPC is of interest 
since this fragment is lethal when ex- pressed in Tg mice 160. Subsequently,  structural studies 
were performed on a longer  fragment  of  PrP  containing  residues  90—231  and  corresponding  to 
SHaPrP 27—30 '55' 161' 162. Expression  of PrP(90—231)  in Tg mice did not pro- duce spontaneous 
disease 163, 164. More recently, NMR structures of recombi- nant full-length  PrP have been  
reported ¹⁵⁶' 165

88

A          resiaue
Physiology  or Medicine  1997

₅₀                    ioo
150
200
















S1   Sa2›
y   2



B









200        08H


Inserñons t2-9)
P105L
'      A117V
TI83A FI98
V180I D178N
2101
217R
M232R •






Mouse

Sheep
S2
Vl6l V
M129V           N 1715

L I08F t109)




Tt8gV ‹t90)
M I l’2T I l09i                               O171R 11 fi81
Figure 4. Species variations and mutations of the prion protein gene. (A) Species variations. The 
x-axis represent  the human  PrP sequence, with the five octarepeats and HI-H4 regions of pu- 
tative secondary structure shown as well as the three n-helices A, B, and C and the two Q-strands 
SI and S2 as determined  by NMR. The precise residues corresponding  to each region  of secon- dary 
structure  are given in  Figure 5. Verucal bars above  the axis indicate the number of species that 
differ from  the human  sequence at each  position. Below the axis, the length  of the bars in- 
dicates the number of alternative  amino acids at each position  in  the alignment.  (B) Mutations 
causing inherited htunan prion disease and polymorphisms in human, mouse, and sheep. Above the line 
of the human  sequence are mutations  that cause prion disease. Below the lines are po- 
lymorphisms, some but not all of which are known  to influence  the onset as well as the phenoty- 
pe of disease. Daa were compiled by Paul Bamborough and Fred E. Cohen.

Models of PrP    suggested that formation of the disease-causing isoform  in- volves refolding of 
residues within the region  between  residues 90 and 140 in- to  Q-sheets  '66;  the  single  
disulfide  bond  joining  COOH-terminal   helices

89

would  remain  intact  since  the  disulfide  is  required  for  PrPS°  formation (Figure 5E)  '6’  
'   . The high  Q-sheet content of PrPSc was predicted from the ability of PrP 27—30 to polymerize 
into amyloid fibrils"7. Subsequent optical


Figure âA








Helix A


Helix C





S2

S1


Helix B

D227

A113


Figure S. Structures of prion proteins. (A) NMlt structure of'Syrian  hamster (SHa) recombinant
(r) PrP(90—231).  Presumably, the structure of the a-helical form of rPrP(90-231)  resembles that 
of PrP*. rPrP(90-281)  is viewed from  the interface where PrP    is thought to bind to Pri. The 
color scheme is: £t-helices A (residues 144-157), B (172—195), and C (200-227) in pink; disulfide 
between  Cys 179  and  Cys2l 4  in  yellow;  conserved  hydrophobic  region  composed  of  residues 
llMl26 in  red; loops in gray;  residues  129—1$4  in green  encompassing strand S1 and residues 
159—165       blue  encompassing  strand  S2;  the  arrows  span  residues  129-131  and  161-163,  
as these  show  a closer  resemblance  to Q-sheet  '55. (B)  NMR structure  of rPrP(90—231)  is 
viewed from the interface where protein X is thought to bind to PrP*. Protein  X appears to bind to 
the side chains of residues that form a discontinuous epitope: some amino acids are in the loop 
com- posed of residues 16M171 and at the end of helix B (Gln 168 and Gln 172 with a low density van 
der WaaJs rendering) while others are on the surface of helix C (Thr2l5 and Gln2l9 with a high 
density van der Waals rendering)      .  (C) PrP residues governing  the transmission  of prions    
' NMR structure of recombinant SHaPrP region  121—231  ’⁵’ shown with  the putative epitope for- 
med  by  residues  184,  186,  203,  and  206  highlighted  in  red. Residue  numbers  correspond  
to SHaPrP. Additional  residues  (138,  139,  143,  145,  148, and  155)  that might  participate  
in  con- trolling  the transmission  of prions across species are depicted  in green. Residues  
168,  172, 215, and 219 that form the epitope for the binding of protein X are shown in blue. The 
three helices (A, B, and C) are highlighted in pink. (D) Schematic diagram showing the flexibility 
of the poly- peptide chain for PrP(2W23I)  ’S'.  The strucmre of the portion of the protein  
representing resi- dues 90—Z3l  was taken from the coordinates of PrP(90—251)  "’.   The remainder 
of the sequence was hand-built for illustration  purposes only. The color scale corresponds to the  
heteronuclear
]'Hl-'SN NOE data: red for the lowest (most negative) values, where the polypeptide  is most flex- 
ible, to blue for the highest (most positive) values in the most structured and rigid regions of 
the protein.(E} Plausible model for the tertiary structure of human Proc  *66. Color scheme is: Sl  
Q- strands are 10&-III and 1 \6—122  in red; S2 §-strands are  l2B—1g5 and  ) 3&-144 in green; 
a-heJi- ces H3 (residues 178—191) and H4 (residues 202-218) in gray; loop (residues  142—I 77) in 
yellow. Four residues implicated  in  the species  barrier are shown  in  ball-and-stick form  (Asn 
 108,  Met 112, Met 129, Ala 135).

90               Physiology  or Medifine  1997

specwoscopy  confirmed the presence  of|3-sheet in both PrP    and PrP 27-30
*'' '6     ’”.  Deletion  of each  of the regions of putative  secondary  structure  in PrP, except 
for the NHS-terminal  66 amino acids (residues 25—88)  16'  l"   and a 36 amino acid region  (Mo 
residues  141 -176)  prevented formation  of PrPSc as measured in scrapie—infected cultured 
neuroblastoma  cells '6'.  With O-PrP Fabs selected from phage display libraries 15* and two 
monoclonal antibodies (mAb)  derived  from  hybridomas  '7“  7',  the major  conformational  change 
that occurs during conversion  of PrP* into PrPS* has been  localized largely, but not entirely,  
to a region  bounded by residues 9tl and  112   5®. Similar con- clusions were drawn  from studies 
with an  lx-PrP  IgM rnAb '7*. While  these re- sumindicate   that   PrP'°  formation   involves   
primarily   a  conformational change  in  the  domain  comprised  of residues  90-112,  mutations  
causing in- herited prion diseases have been found throughout the protein  (Figure 4B). 
Interestingly, all of the known  point mutations in PrP with  biological  signifi- cance occur 
either within  or adjacent to regions of putative secondary struc- ture in PrP and as such, appear 
to destabilize  the structure  of PrP ”'   ”⁸  ¹⁵⁴.
NNtR  struct:ure   of  recombinnnf  fYfi  The  NMR  structure   of  recDmbinant SHaPrP(90—231)  
derived  from  A.  ro/i was determined  after  the  protein  was purified  and  refolded  (Figure  
SA).  Residues  90-112  are  nDt  shown  since marked conformational heterogeneity was found in 
this region while residues 11 M126 constitute the conserved hydrophobic region  that also displays 
some structural    plasticity    ’b*.   Although    some   features   of    the   structure    of 
rPrP(90—231)  are  similar  to  those  reported  earlier for the  smaller  recombi- nant  
MoPrP(121—251)  fragment   54    *,  substantial  differences  were  found.


Figure SB







HexC

Helix B




172



Q168



Q216

Helix A

Sixn If   B.  Prusi,nei‘




Helix B                Q 186
V12

Q172



Q168



1203            1184


T215      Helix C


1205
N155            139
Q219
N143





W145

Helix A

R148

M138



F‹›i   cxariiplt ,  the  lt›up  at  the  NI3g-ter rrñiiits  tif  he1 x  R  is  well  ‹lefinrrl  in 
rPrP(9()—23 1)  but  is disordered  in  Mol'rP( 121—2'4l) ;  in  addition,  helix  I?  is 
c‹›riiptised   of   i esiclties   20W227   in   rPrP(98—231)   but   extends   ‹only   fi our 
20f)—2 17  in  MoPrP( 121—231).  The  loop  and  the  I  O€JH-terminal  portion  of’ helix C are 
particularly  important since  they form  the site tti which  protein  X binds  as described  below 
 (Figure  GB)  ˡ".   Whether  the difl'erences  hetween the  two recombinant PrP fragments are due  
to (i)  their different lengths,  (ii) recies specific  dil’f’erences  in  sequences,  or  (iii)  
the  rendition.s  used  for sol-
inng the structures  remains  to be determined.
Stii‹lies  of  chimeric  SHa/Mo  and  flu/Mr  PrP  transgenes  iclentified  a do- main  comprised 
of  residues 95 —170 where  PrP" binds  to Pri'*   ’*3'"    . When chimeric  R‹i/Mtr Pi’P 
transgene.s failecl tc› reiicler mice sensitive  to BSE pi ii›ns, we  examined  the differences 
among  the sequences  in the chimeric  and par- ent PrP genes ""'. The findings identified a second 
domain  in PrP composed o1’ residues  lH0—205  which  seems  to  modulate  the  interaction  
between  PrP" and PrP"ᶜ (Figure  5C).
Recent  NMR  studies  of’ full  length  MoPrP(2M23l)  and  SHaPrP(29—?S 1) have shown that the 
NHS-termini  are highly flexible and lack identifiable sec-
‹›nclary  structtlre  under  the  experimental  conditions  employed  (Figure  ID) '°G  ’⁶*.  
Studies  of  SHaPrP(29—231)  indicate  transient  interactions  between the COOH-terminal  end of 
helix B and the highly flexible, NHS-terminal  ran-

92

Figure SD
Ph   siologf   or  Medicine  1997











-0  . J





















dom-coil containing the octareapeats  (residues 29—125)  l5‘; such interactions were not reported 
for MoPrP(23-231)   65.
ZIP  asean to  html  c       er.  The highly  flexible  NHS-terrrtinus of  recombi- nant   PrP   
may   be   more   structured   in   the   presence   .of   copper.   Each SHaPrP(29—231) molecule. 
was found to bind two atoms of Cu**; other diva- lent cations did not bind to PrP   8'.  Earlier 
studies with synthetic peptides cor- responding  to  the  octarepeat  sequence demonstrated  the  
binding  of  Cu** ions "’'  '    and optical spectroscopy showed that Cu  * induced an o-helix for- 
mation  in  these  peptides  l8*. .More  recently,  PrP-deficient  (Prnp"')  mice were .found to 
have  lower  levels  of  Zn/Cu  superoxide  dismutase  (SOD)  ac- tivity than controls '®4; SOD 
activity has been shown to mirror the state of cop- per  .metabolism   185.  Measurements  of  
membrane   extracts  from  brains  of Prnp*’0  mice  showed  low levels  of  Cu whereas  Fe  and  
Zn  were  unchanged suggesting PrPC might funcHon as a Cu** binding protein '®*.
Disturbances  in  Gu** homeostasis  leading  to  dysfunction  of  the CNS  are well documented in  
humans and animals but are not known  to be due to ab- normalities in PrP metabolism: Menkes 
disease is manifest at birth and is due to a mutation of the MNk gene on the X chromosome while 
Wilson's disease

Stand  B.  Prusiner                                                      93
Figure 5E
























appears  in  childhood  and is due  to a  mutation  of  the WD gene on  chromo- some  13  '87-1'0. 
Both  the  MNK  and  WD  genes  encode  copper  transporting ATPases.  While  both  Menkes  and  
Wilson's  diseases  are  recessive  disorders,
only  Wilson's  disease  can  be  treated  with  copper  chelating  reagents.  Inter- estingly, 
cuprizone,  a Cu'* chelating reagent, has been used in mice to induce neuropathological changes 
similar to those found in the prion diseases "''   ""
PrP   gene   structure   and   expression.   The   entire   open   reading   frame (ORF)  of all  
known  mammalian  and avian  PrP genes resides within  a single exon  "  '  ' ""   "‘.   The  mouse 
 (Mo),  sheep,  cattle,  and  rat PrP genes contain three  exons with  the ORFs in  exon  3"     "' 
  which  is analogous  to exon  2 of the Syrian hamster (SHa) gene '2. The two exons of the Syrian  
hamster  (SHa) PrP gene are separated  by a  lHkb intron: exon  1 encodes a portion  of the 5' 
untranslated  leader sequence while exon  2 encodes the ORF and  3' untrans- lated region  82. 
Recently,  a low abundance  SHaPrP  mRNA containing  an  ad- ditional  small  exon  in  the  5’ 
untranslated  region  was discovered  that  is en- coded by the SHaPrP gene *".  Comparative 
sequencing  of sheep and human (Hu)  cosmid  clones  containing  PrP  genes  revealed  an  
additional  putative, small untranslated  5’ exon in the HuPrP gene "'.   The promoters of both  
the

94                                        Physiology  or  Medicine  1997

SHa and  Mo PrP genes contain  multiple  copies of G-C  rich  repeats and  are devoid of TATA 
boxes. These G-C nonamers represent a motif that may func- tion as a canonical  binding site for  
the transcription  factor Spl  *02. Mapping of PrP genes to the short arm of Hu  chromosome 20 and  
to the homologous region  of  Mo  chromosome  2 argues for  the existence  of PrP genes  prior  to 
the speciation  of mammals  20"  20’.
Although  PrP mRNA is constitutively expressed  in  the  brains of adult ani- mals ⁸"  ”,  it is 
highly regulated during development.  In  the septum, levels of PrP  mRNA and  choline  
acetyltransferase were  found  to  increase  in  parallel during  development  205.  In  other  
brain  regions,  PrP  gene  expression  oc- curred  at  an  earlier  age.  In  situ  hybridization  
studies  show  that  the  highest levels of  PrP mRNA are found in neurons *’6.
Pri    expression  in  brain  was defined  by standard  immunohistochemistry 20’   and   by   
histoblotting   in   the   brains   of   uninfected   controls   *08.   Im- munostaining  of PrPC 
in the SHa brain was most intense in  the stratum  radi- atum  and stratum  oriens of the CAl  
region  of the hippocampus and was vir- tually  absent  from   the  granule   cell  layer  of   the 
 dentate   gyms  and   the pyramidal  cell layer  throughout Ammon's  horn.  PrPS° staining  was 
minimal in those regions which were intensely stained for PrPC. A similar relationship between  
PrPC and PrPSc  was found  in  the amygdala.  In  contrast,  PrPSc  accu- mulated  in  the medial  
habenular  nucleus,  the medial  septal  nuclei,  and  the diagonal band of Broca; in contrast, 
these areas were virtually devoid of PrPC. In  the white  matter,  bundles  of  myelinated  axons  
contained  PrP     but were devoid of  PrP*. These  findings suggest  that prions are transported  
along ax- ons and are in agreement with earlier findings in which scrapie infectivity was found to 
migrate in a pattern  consistent with retrograde transport °     2''
Molecular genetics of prion diseases.  Independent of enriching brain frac- tions for scrapie 
infectivity that led to the discovery of PrPSc, the PrP gene was shown  to be genetically linked to 
a locus controlling scrapie incubation  times
*'*.  Subsequently,   mutation   of  the  PrP  gene  was  shown  to  be  genetically linked  to  
the  development  of familial  prion  disease  4. At the same  time, ex- pression  of  a  SHaPrP  
transgene  in  mice  was  shown  to  render  the  animals highly susceptible  to SHa prions 
demonstrating  that expression  of  a foreign PrP gene could abrogate the species barrier 2'3. 
Later, PrP-deficient  (Prnp0’0) mice  were  found  to  be  resistant  to  prion  infection  and  
failed  to  replicate prions,  as  expected  ¹’0   *01. The  results  of  these  studies  indicated 
 PrP  must play a central role in the transmission  and pathogenesis of prion disease but equally 
important, they argued that the abnormal isoform is an essential com- ponent of the prion particle 
23.
T'rP  gene dosage  cont:robs  length  of  in‹nd›ab’‹m  time.  Scrapie  incubation  times in mice 
were used  to distinguish  prion strains and to identify a gene control- ling its length  *35' *".  
This gene was initially called  Sinc based on genetic cros- ses  between  C57Bl  and  VM  mice  
that exhibited  short  and  long  incubauon times,  respectively  214. Because  of  the restricted 
distribution  of VM mice, we searched for another mouse with long incubation  times. I/Ln mice 
proved to be  a suitable  substitute  for VM mice  215; eventually,  I/Ln  and VM  mice were

Stanley B. Prusiner                                               95

found to be derived from a common ancestor °'6. With a PrP cDNA probe, we demonstrated  genetic  
linkage  between  the PrP gene and a locus controlling the incubation  time in crosses between 
NZW/LacJ  and I/Ln mice *'². We pro-
visionally designated  these genes as components of the Pm  complex but even-
tually found that the incubation  time gene, Pm-i, is either congruent with or closely linked to 
the PrP gene, T'rnp ¹’⁴.
Although  the amino acid substitutions in PrP that distinguish  NZW (Prnp°) from  I/Ln  (Prnpb)  
mice  argued  for  congruency  of  Prnp  and  Pm-i,  experi- ments  with  Prnp°  mice  expressing  
Prue‘ transgenes  demonstrated  a  “para- doxical” shortening  of incubation  times  ˡ’5. We had 
predicted  that these Tg mice would  exhibit a prolongation  of  the incubation  time  after 
inoculation with  RML prions based on   Prnp°  xPrnpb)  Fl  mice which  do exhibit long in- 
cubation  times. We described  those findings as “paradoxical  shortening” be- cause we and others 
had believed for many years  that long incubation  times are dominant traits 2'*' °l’. From studies 
of congenic and transgenic mice ex- pressing  different  numbers  of  the  a and  b alleles  of  
Prnp,  we  learned  that these findings were not paradoxical; indeed, they resulted from increased 
PrP gene  dosage  'l’.  When  the  RML  isolate  was  inoculated  into  congenic  and transgenic 
mice, increasing the number of copies of the o allele was found to be  the  major determinant  in  
reducing  the incubation  time;  however,  incre- asing  the number of copies of the  b allele also 
reduced  the incubation  time, but not to the same extent as that seen with  the  a allele. From  
the foregoing investigations, we concluded  that both  Sinc and f'm-i are congruent with PrP 2",  
and recent gene targeting studies have confirmed this view °ˡ  .
Overexpression of wtPrP transgenes.  Mice were constructed expressing differ- ent  levels  of  the  
wild-type  (wt)  SHaPrP  transgene  *¹3. Inoculation  of  these Tg(SHaPrP)  mice  with  SHa  prions 
 demonstrated  abrogation  of  the  species barrier resulting  in abbreviated  incubation  times 
°ˡ’.  The length of the incu- bation  time  after inoculation  with  SHa prions  was  inversely  
proportional  to the level of SHaPrPC in the brains of Tg(SHaPrP)  mice *".   Bioassays of brain 
extracts  from  clinically  ill  Tg(SHaPrP)  mice  inoculated  with  Mo  prions  re- vealed that 
only Mo prions but no SHa prions were produced. Conversely,  in- oculation  of  Tg(SHaPrP)  mice  
with  SHa prions  led only to  the  synthesis  of SHa prions. Although  the rate of PrP^ synthesis 
appears  to be a function  of the level of PrP* expression  in Tg mice,  the level to which  PrPSc  
finally accu- mulates seems to be independent of PrPC concentration  ²¹⁹
During  transgenetic  studies,  we  discovered  that  uninoculated  older  mice harboring  numerous 
 copies  of  wtPrP  transgenes  derived  from  Syrian  ham- sters,  sheep,  and  f'rn     mice  
spontaneously  developed  truncal  ataxia,  hind- limb paralysis, and tremors '97. These Tg mice 
exhibited a profound  necroti- zing  myopathy  involving  skeletal  muscle,  a  demyelinating  
polyneuropathy, and focal vacuolation  of the CNS. Development of disease was dependent on 
transgene  dosage.  For  example,  Tg(SHaPrP*’“) 7  mice  homozygous  for  the SHaPrP  transgene  
array  regularly  developed  disease  between  400  and  600 days of  age, while  hemizygous 
Tg(SHaPrP”0)7 mice also developed  disease, but only after >650 days.

96                                     Physiology  or  Medicine  1997

PrP-deficient  mice.  The  development  and  lifespan  of  two  lines  of PrP-defi- cient  (Prnp⁰  
⁰)  mice  were  indistinguishable  from  controls  **⁰  **’  while  two other  lines  exhibited  
ataxia  and  Purkinje  cell degeneration  at -70   weeks  of age  °°°  (R.  Moore  and  D.  Melton, 
 in  preparation) . In  the  former  two  lines with  normal  development,  altered  sleep wake  
cycles  have  been  reported  **3 and altered synaptic behavior in brain slices was reported 224  
**'  but could not be confirmed  by others °°6  °°’
Prnp0”  mice  are  resistant  to prions  “0' ”¹. Prnp0  0  mice were  sacrificed  5, 60,  120,  and 
 315  days  after  inoculation  with  RML  prions  and  brain  extracts bioassayed in CD-1  Swiss 
mice. Except for residual infectivity from  the inocu- lum  detected  at  5  days  after  
inoculation,  no  infectivity  was  detected  in  the brains  of  Prnp0”   mice  '0'.  One  group  
of  investigators  found  that  Prnp0’0
mice inoculated with RML prions and sacrificed  20 weeks later had  103 6  ID50
units/ml  of  homogenate  by bioassay  '00. Others  have  used  this  report  to ar-
gue  that  prion  infectivity  replicates  in  the  absence  of  PrP  ⁶'  '³*. Neither  we nor the 
authors of the initial report could confirm  the finding of prion  repli- cation  in  Prnp0/0mice  
'0d 103
Prion  species  barrier  and protein  X.  The  passage  of  prions  between  spe- cies is often a 
stochastic process, almost always characterized  by prolonged in- cubation  times during  the first 
passage  in the new host 36. This prolongation is often  referred  to as  the  “species  barrier   
³⁶  **'. Prions synthesized  de novo reflect the sequence of the host PrP gene and not that of the 
PrPSc  molecules in  the inoculum  derived  from  the donor '0. On  subsequent  passage  in a ho- 
mologous  host,  the incubation  time  shortens  to  that  recorded  for all  subse- quent 
passages. From studies with Tg mice, three factors have been identified that contribute  to the 
species barrier:  (i)  the difference  in PrP sequences be- tween the prion donor and recipient, 
(ii) the strain of prion, and (iii) the spe- cies specificity of protein  X, a factor defined by 
molecular genetic studies that binds to PrPC and facilitates PrPSc  formation. This factor is 
likely to be a pro- tein, hence  the provisional  designation  protein  X"4  "'.The prion  donor is 
the  last  mammal  in  which  the  prion  was  passaged  and  its  PrP  sequence  re- presents the 
“species” of the prion. The strain of prion, which seems to be en- ciphered  in  the  conformation  
of  PrPS°,  conspires  with  the  PrP  sequence, which is specified by the recipient,  to determine 
 the tertiary structure of nas- cent PrPS°. These principles are demonstrated by studies on the 
transmission of Syrian  hamster  (SHa)  prions to mice showing  that expression  of a SHaPrP 
transgene  in mice abrogated the species barrier (Table 3) *’3. Besides the PrP sequence,  the  
strain  of  prion  modified  transmission  of  SHa  prions  to  mice
(Table  3)  '35  229d 230
Transmission ofhuman prions. Protein  X was postulated to explain the results on the transmission  
of human  (Hu)  prions to Tg mice  (Table  4)  ’34' ”9. Mice expressing  both  Mo and HuPrP  were  
resistant  to Hu  prions while  those  ex- pressing  only HuPrP were susceptible.  These results 
argue  that MoPrPC  inhi- bited  transmission  of  Hu  prions  i.e.  the  formation  of  nascent  
HuPrPSc.  In contrast  to the foregoing  studies,  mice expressing  both  MoPrP  and chimeric MHu2M 
 PrP were susceptible  to Hu prions and mice expressing  MHu2MPrP

Stand  B.  Prusiner                                                        97
Table 3. Influence of prion species and strains on transmission across a species barrier*
Inoculum        Host                                   Sc237                                        
l39H Incubation  time / [days *  SEM]  (n/n  )

SHa SHa SHa
SHa
SHa
non-Tg mice Tg(SHaPrP) 81/ FVB mice Tg(SHaPrP) 81/ Prnp⁰  '  mice
’7’7 + 1        (48/48)                 167+1      (94/94)
>’700          (0/9)                     499     15    (11/11)
7S + 2        (22/22)                 110 + 2      (19/19)

54 + 1        (9/9)                     65 + 1        (15/IS)
*data  from  references  '0'' °"  °30  (D.  Groth  and S.B. Prusiner,  unpublished  data) .  n/nq = 
number of diseased animals / number of injected animals.

alone  were   only  slightly   more   susceptible.   These   findings  contend   that MoPrP*   has  
 only   a   minimal    effect    on    the   formation    of    chimeric MHu2MPrPSc.
Table 4. Evidence for  protein X from transmission  studies of  human prions{
Inoculum        Host                                         MoPrP gene         Incubation  Time 
[days + SEM]  (n/no)

sCJD                Tg(HuPrP)                              Prnp*'+
sCJD                 Tg(HuPrP) Prnp0'0                    Prnp0  0
sCJD                Tg(MHu2M)                           Prnp+'+ sCJD                Tg(MHu2M) Prnp⁰ 
 ⁰            Prnp⁰  ⁰
}data with inoculum  RG 134
721            1/10)
263 + 2      (6/6)
238 + 3      (8/8)
191 + 3      10/10)

Genetic cadence for  fmotein X.  When  the data on Hu prion  transmission  to Tg mice  were  
considered  together,  they  suggested  that  MoPrPC  prevented  the conversion  of  HuPrPC  into  
PrPSc  but  had  little  effect  on  the  conversion  of MHu2M  into PrPS° by binding  to another 
Mo protein. We interpreted  these results  in  terms  of  MoPrPC binding  to  this  Mo protein  
with  a higher affinity than does HuPrPC. We postulated that MoPrPC had little effect on the forma- 
tion of PrPSc  from MHu2M  (Table 4)  because  MoPrP and MHu2M share the same  amino  acid  
sequence  at  the  COOH-terminus.  We  hypothesized  that MoPrPC only weakly inhibited transmission 
 of SHa prions to Tg(SHaPrP)  mice (Table  3)  because  SHaPrP is more closely related to MoPrP  
than is HuPrP.
Using  scrapie-infected  mouse  (Mo)  neuroblastoma  cells  transfected  with chimeric   Hu/Mo   
PrP   genes,   we   extended   our   studies   of   protein   X. Substitution  of a Hu residue at 
position 214 or 218 prevented PrPS’ formation (Figure SB)"8. The side chains of these residues 
protrude from the same sur- face of the COOH-terminal  O-helix forming a discontinuous  epitope 
with res-
idues  167 and  171  in  an  adjacent loop.  Substitution  of  a basic  residue  at po- sitions  
167,  171, or 218 prevented PrPSc formation;  these mutant PrPs appear to act as “dominant 
negatives“ by binding protein X and rendering it unavail- able for prion  propagation.  Our 
findings within  the context of protein  X ex- plain  the  protective  effects of  basic  
polymorphic  residues  in  PrP  of  humans
and sheep  ”''    31  232
Is Steiit Xa molecular chnQerone? Since PrP undergoes a profound structu- ral  transition  during  
prion  propagation,  it  seems  likely  that  other  proteins

ss                           Physiology or  Medicine  1997
stich  as chaperones  participate  in  this process. Whether  protein  X functicins as a molecular  
chaperone  is unknown.  Interestingly, scrarie-infected  rel1s  ill culture clisplay marked differ 
ences in  the induction  of heat-shock proteins *"
-"‘  and  Hsp70  mRNA  has  been  repoi ted  to  increase  in  scrapie  gif rnii‘o  """. While 
attempts  to isolate  specific proteins that bind to PrP hnve been  disap- pointing  -*",  Pi P  
has  been  sht›wn  to  interact  with  Brl-2  ancl  Hsp6tl  by  two- hybrid  analysis in yeast  2"’ 
 2**. Although  thcse studies  are suggestive,  no  mo- lecular chaperone  involved  in  pi ion  
f‹ai’mation  in  mammalian  cells has been identified.
Miniprions.  Usi»;;  t›.«  r‹›ur-helix  bundle  model  of  PrP '  (Figure  4A)  "', cach  region  
of  proposed  secondary  structure  was systematically deletecl  and the Instant  constructs  
expressed  in scrapie-infected neur‹iblastoma (ScN2a) cells and Tg mice  ""   ’"'. Deletion  of any 
tif the four putative  helical  regions p»’cvented  PrP"ᶜ fo1 mation  while deletion  of the NH  
-terminal  ref  on  contai- ning  residues  23—8fi  did  not afl'ect  the  yield  of  PrP*c.  In  
addition  to  the  ti7 residues at the NHS-terminus,  36 residues from position  141  to 176 could  
be deleted without altering l'rP"c  lbi mation  (Figures 6 and 7) . The   resulting  Pi P molecule 
of 105 amino acids was designated PrP 106. In this mutant PrP, helix A  as  well  as  flue  S2  
Q-strand  wei'e  removed.  When  PrP 106  was  expressed  in ScN2a  cells,  PrP""l0fi  was  soluble 
 in  1%   Sarkosyl.  Whether  the str urture  of’ PrP"cl OF  can  be  iiiore  readily  determined  
than  that  of  full-length  PrP*"  re- tains uncertain.
Transgene+pecified   ntsc    fibi/iJ.  Tg(PrP 106) Prnp"'  mice   that  expressed l*rl*10fi 
developed  neui ological dysfunction    300 days after inoculatioli  with RML  prions  previously   
passaged   in  CD-1  Swiss  mice  (S.  Supattapone,   T. Muramoto,  D. l°erctz,  S.J. DeArmond, A. 
Wallace, F. E. Cohen,  S. B. Pi iisinel’ and  M.  R.  Scott,  in  preparation) .  The  resulting  
prions  containing  PrP"' 106

Helix  A



Helix  B


T215

Q219
Q172
Helix C                Q168



Figure 6. Miniprions  rrotlticed by cleleting  PrP residues 2.     9 and  141—I 7fi. The deletion  
of re- sidues  141—176  (green) contain ing helix A and the S2 §-strand   is slitiwn.

Stand  B. Prusiner                                                 99



























Figure  7. Tg(PrPl06)  Prnp0’* mice  were inoculated  with  RMLl06  prions  containing  Pri*‘ 106. 
Sections of the hippocampus  stained with  hematoxylin  (A and C) and eosin  (B and D). (A and B)   
Control   Tg{PrP106)   mouse   uninoculated   and  without   neurologic   deficits.   (C  and   D) 
Tg(PrPl06)   Prnp*’0  mouse inoculated with RMLl06 prions and sacrificed after signs of neuro- 
logic dysfunction  observed. PhotomicrogmphS prepared by Stephen J.  DeArmond.

produced    CNS    disease    in      66    days    upon    subsequent    passage    in Tg(PrPI06) 
Prnp”⁰ mice. (Table 5).  Besides widespread spongiform degene- ration and PrP deposits, the 
pyramidal  cells of the hippocampus  comprising the CA-1, CA-2, and CA-3 fields disappeared in 
Tg(PrPl06) Prnp'    mice ino- culated with prions containing PrPScl06  (Figure 7A—D). In no 
previous study of Tg mice have we seen similar neuropathological lesions. The Tg(MoPrP-A) mice  
overexpressing  MoPrP  are  resistant  to  RMLI06  miniprions,  but  are
highly sii*••r"*   • to RMI  r"ons. These mire require more than 250 days to produce illness after 
inoculation  with miniprions  but develop disease in -50 days when inoculated with RML prions 
containing  full-length MoPrN'.

100                                      Physiology or    Medicine  199?

Table 5. Susceptibility and resistance of transgenic mice to artificial miniprions*
Host                                                     RMLI06 miniprions              RML prions 
Incubation  time  [days + SEM]  (n/n  )
Tg(PrP106)Prnp0  0 mice                 66     3        (10/10)                 300 + 2      (9/10)
Tg(MoPrP-A)  mice                            >250          (0/11)                     50 + 2      
(16/16)
*data from references 2”  (S. Supattapone, T. Muramoto, D. Peretz, S.J. DeArmond, A. Wal- lace, F. 
E. Cohen, S. B. Prusiner and M. R. Scott, in preparation).


Smaller  fmions  aitd   tytnimf uiritses.  The unique  incubation  times and  neu- ropathogy in Tg 
mice caused by miniprions are difficult to reconcile with the notion  that scrapie is caused by an 
as yet unidentified virus. When the mutant or wt PrPC  of  the host matched PrPSc  in  the 
inoculum,  the mice were  highly susceptible  (Table 5). However, when  there was a mismatch 
between PrPC and Pri, the mice were resistant to the prions. This principle of homologous PrP 
interactions  which underlies the species barrier  (Table  3)  is recapitulated  in studies   of   
PrP 106  where   the   amino   acid  sequence   has  been   drastically changed  by deleting  
nearly 50% of the residues. Indeed,  the unique proper- ties of  the miniprions  provide  another  
persuasive  argument  supporting  the contention  that prions are infectious proteins.
Human  prion  diseases.  Most  humans  afflicted with  prion  disease  present with   rapidly   
progressive   dementia,   but  some   manifest   cerebellar   ataxia. Although  the brains of 
patients appear grossly normal upon post-mortem  ex- amination,  they usually show spongiform  
degeneration  and astrocytic gliosis under  the  microscope.  The  human  prion  diseases  can  
present  as  sporadic, genetic, or infectious disorders  5  (Table  IA) .
@orndic CQ.  Sporadic  forms of prion  disease  comprise  most cases of CJD and  possibly  a  few  
cases  of  Gerstmann-Striiussler-Scheinker  disease   (GSS) (Table  lA)   4' *”   2’0.  In  these  
patients,  mutations  of  the  PrP  gene  are  not found.  How  prions  causing  disease  arise  in 
 patients  with  sporadic  forms  is unknown;  hypotheses include horizontal transmission of prions 
from humans or animals  *’1, somatic  mutation  of  the PrP gene,  and spontaneous  conver- sion  
of  PrP*  into  PrP’c  5, 15. Since  numerous  attempts  to  establish  an  infec-
tious link between sporadic CJD and a preexisting  prion disease in animals or humans  have been 
unrewarding,  it seems unlikely that transmission  features in the pathogenesis  of sporadic prion 
disease     ’2' *4*
Inherited prion diseases.  To date,  20 different  mutations  in  the  human  PrP gene  resulting  
in  nonconservative substitutions  have  been  found  that segre- gate with the inherited prion 
diseases (Figure 4B). Familial CJD cases suggest- ed that genetic factors might influence 
pathogenesis  1   *' *’3, but this was diffi- cult to reconcile with the transmissibility of fCJD 
and GSS 3. The discovery of genetic  linkage  between  the PrP gene  and scrapie  incubation  times 
in  mice
*¹* raised the possibility that mutation  might feature in the hereditary human prion  diseases.  
The P102L mutation  was the first PrP mutation  to  be geneti- cally  linked  to  CNS  dysfunction  
in  GSS  (Figure  4B)    and  has  since  been found in many GSS families throughout  the world 
2“*46. Indeed, a mutation

Stanley B.  Prusiner                                             101

in the protein  coding  region  of the PrP gene has been found in all reported kindred  with  
familial  human  prion  disease;  besides  the  P102L  mutation, genetic linkage  has been 
established for four other mutations  '6'     3’
Tg mouse studies confirmed  that mutations of the PrP gene can cause neu- rodegeneration. The P102L 
mutation  of GSS was introduced into the MoPrP transgene  and five lines of Tg(MoPrP-Pl0lL)  mice 
expressing  high  levels of mutant  PrP  developed  spontaneous  CNS  degeneration  consisting  of  
wide- spread vacuolation  of the neuropil, astrocytic gliosis, and numerous PrP amy- loid  plaques  
similar  to  those  seen  in  the  brains  of  humans  who  die  from
GSS(P102L)    *47-*49.   Brain    extracts    prepared    from    spontaneously    ill
Tg(MoPrP-P101L)  mice  transmitted  CNS  degeneration   to  Tg196  mice  but contained  no 
protease-resistant PrP  *’8  24’.  The Tg 196 mice  do  not develop spontaneous  disease  but 
express  low levels of  the mutant  transgene  MoPrP- P101L and are deficient for mouse PrP  
(Prnp0’0)  2*0. These studies,  combin- ed with the transmission  of prions from patients who died 
of GSS to apes and monkeys     or  to  Tg(MHu2M-P101L)  mice  '34, demonstrate  that  prions  are 
generated de novo by mutations  in PrP. Additionally,  brain  extracts from pa- tients with some 
other inherited prion diseases, fCJD(E200K)  or FFI, transmit disease  to Tg(MHu2M)  mice  2’. An  
artificial  set of mutations  in a PrP  trans- gene  consisting  of AI 13V, Al 15V,  and A118V 
produced  neurodegeneration in neonatal mice; these Val substitutions were selected for their 
propensity  to form |3  sheets  153, *50. In preliminary  studies,  brain  extracts from  two of  
these mice  transmitted  disease  to hamsters and  to Tg  mice  expressing  a chimeric SHa/Mo PrP.
Genic  disease  heat  is  tranmnissible.  Had  the  PrP  gene  been  identified  in families with  
prion  disease  by positional  cloning  or through  the purification and sequencing  of PrP in 
amyloid plaques  before  brain  extracts were shown to be transmissible, the prion  concept might 
have been  more  readily accept- ed. Within  that scenario,  it seems likely that we would have 
explored the pos- sibility  that  the  mutant  protein,  upon  inoculation  into  a  susceptible  
host, stimulated  production  of more of a similar protein. Postulating an infectious pathogen  
with  a foreign  genome would  have  been  the least likely candidate to explain  how a genetic 
disease could be experimentally transmissible.
ZJectfous Jon     diseases.  The  infectious  prion  diseases  include  kuru  of  the Fore people 
in New Guinea where prions were transmitted  by ritualistic  can- nibalism   *’¹  *⁵¹'  *⁵°.  With  
 the   cessation   of   cannibalism   at  the   urging   of missionaries,  kuru began  to decline 
long before it was known  to be transmis-
sible (Figure 8). Sources of prions causing infectious CJD on several different continents include  
improperly sterilized  depth  electrodes,  transplanted  cor-
neas, human growth hormone  (HGH)  and gonadotrophin  derived from cad- averic pituitaries,  and 
dura mater grafts *53. Over 90 young adults have devel- oped CJD after treatment with cadaveric 
HGH; the incubation  periods range from  3  to  more  than  20  years  *’4   *55. Dura  mater  
grafts  implanted  during neurosurgical  procedures  seem  to  have  caused  more  than  60  cases  
of  CJD; these incubation  periods range from one to more  than  14 years 25      25
Prion  diversity.  The  existence  of  prion  strains  raises  the  question  of  how

102                                      Physiology or Medicine  199'7

A



30000



20000



10000




B
500•


400•


300•


200•


100•



55
85


















60                6'5
90



















7'0              75
Time  tvear)
95


















8'0      85
Figure  8. Disappearance  of the kuru and BSE epidemics.  (A) Number of annual cases of BSE in 
cattle in Great Britain.  (B) Number of biannual  cases of kuru in Papua New Guinea.  Data com- 
piled for BSE by John Wilesmith  and for kuru by Michael Alpers.


heritable biological information  can be enciphered in a molecule other than nucleic acid 13* °'4  
*5’ *63. Strains or varieties of prions have  been defined  by incubation   times   and   the   
distribution   of   neuronal   vacuolation   *"'  *⁶⁴ Subsequently,  the  patterns of PrPSᶜ 
deposition  were found  to correlate  with vacuolation  profiles and  these patterns were also used 
 to characterize  strains
of  prions *30  265  266
The    typing  of  prion  strains  in  C57Bl,  VM,  and   Fl  (C57Bl  x  VM)  inbred mice began 
with isolates from sheep with scrapie. The  prototypic strains cal- led Me7 and  22A gave 
incubation  times of -150 and   400 days in C57Bl mice, respectively *l" *6’  268. The  PrP  genes 
of C57Bl and  I/Ln  (and later VM)  mi- ce encode  proteins differing at  two  residues and  
control  scrapie incubation
times ”t 212d 216-218, 269
Until recently, support for the hypothesis that the tertiary structure of PrPSᶜ

Stanley B.  Prusiner                                             103

enciphers strain-specific information  23 was minimal except for the DY strain isolated  from  mink 
 with  transmissible  encephalopathy by passage  in  Syrian hamsters  26   2’0   °7'.   PrPSc   in  
 DY  prions  showed  diminished   resistance   to proteinase  K digestion  as well  as  a peculiar  
site  of  cleavage.  The  DY strain presented  a puzzling  anomaly since other prion strains 
exhibiting  similar in- cubation  times did not show this altered susceptibility to proteinase  K 
diges- tion  of  PrPSc  ’3°. Also  notable  was  the generation  of new strains  during  pas-
sage of prions through animals with different PrP genes '3° °°9.
GYM c     orniotion enciphers dirersity. Persuasive evidence that strain-specific information is 
enciphered  in the tertiary structure of PrPSc  comes from trans- mission of two different 
inherited human prion diseases to mice expressing a chimeric  MHu2M  PrP transgene  *’. In fatal 
familial insomnia  (FFI) , the pro- tease-resistant  fragment  of  PrPSc  after  deglycosylation  
has  an  M,  of  19  kD; whereas in fCJD(E200K)  and most sporadic prion diseases,  it is 21 kD  
(Table 6)  2’2' 2".   This difference  in molecular size was shown  to be due to different sites of 
proteolytic cleavage at the NH₂-termini  of the two human PrPSc  mole- cules reflecting different 
tertiary structures *’2. These distinct conformations were understandable since  the amino acid 
sequences of the PrPs differ.
Table 6. Distinct prion strains generated in humans with inherited prion diseases and trans- mitted 
to transgenic mice*
Inoculum                         Host             Host PrP                    Incubation  time      
  PrP“(kD) Species        Genotype                   [days + SEM]  (n/n  )
None                                Human        FFI(D178N,M129)    19
FFI                                    Mouse          Tg(MHu2M)              206 + 7      (7/7)     
    19
FFI —+ Tg(MHu2M)        Mouse          Tg(MHu2M)              136 z 1      (6/6)         19
None                                Human        fCJD(E200K)             21
fCJD                                 Mouse          Tg(MHu2M)              170 + 2      (10/10)     
21
fCJD —r Tg(MHu2M)     Mouse          Tg(MHu2M)              167 + 3      (15/15)     21
*data from reference °’ (G. Telling et al., in preparation) .

Extracts  from  the  brains  of  FFI  patients  transmitted  disease  to  mice  ex- pressing  a 
chimeric  MHu2M  PrP gene  about 200 days after inoculation  and
induced formation  of the  19 kD PrPS’; whereas  f*JD(E200K)  and s*JD pro- duced the 21 kD PrPSc  
in mice expressing  the same  transgene °’.  On second
passage, Tg(MHu2M)  mice inoculated with FFI prions showed an incubation time of -130 days and a 19 
kD PrP    while those inoculated with fCJD(E200K) prions  exhibited  an incubation  time of    170 
days and a 21  kD PrPSc  *'.  The
experimental  data demonstrate  that MHu2MPrPSc  can  exist in  two different conformations  based 
on the sizes of  the protease-resistant fragments; yet, the amino acid sequence of MHu2MPrPSc  is 
invariant.
The  results  of  our  studies argue  that PrPSc  acts as a template  for  the  con- version of 
PrPC into nascent PrPSc. Imparting  the size of  the protease-resistant fragment of PrPS’ through 
conformational templating provides a mechanism for both  the generation  and propagation  of prion 
strains.
Interestingly, the protease-resistant fragment of PrPSc  after deglycosylation with  an  M, of  19  
kD  has been  found in  a patient who developed  a sporadic

104                                      Physiology  or Medicine  199'7

case of prion disease similar to FFI but with  no family history. Since both PrP alleles  encoded  
the wt sequence  and  a Met  at position  129,  we  labeled  this case, fatal sporadic insomnia 
(FSI) . At autopsy, the spongiform degeneration, reactive  astrogliosis,  and PrPSc  deposition  
were confined  to the  thalamus  *’4. These findings argue  that the clinicopathologic phenotype  
is determined  by the conformation  of PrPSc in accord with the results of the transmission of hu- 
man prions from patients with FFI to Tg mice
Selective neuronal targeting. Besides incubation  times, profiles of spongiform change  (Figure  1) 
have been used to characterize prion strains *7’,  but recent studies argue  that such  profiles 
are  not an  intrinsic  feature  of strains  *’6' *’7 The mechanism  by which prion strains modify 
the pattern of spongiform  de- generation  was  perplexing  since  earlier investigations had  
shown  that  PrPSc deposition  precedes  neuronal  vacuolation  and  reactive  gliosis  °'’   230. 
When FFI prions were inoculated into Tg(MHu2M)  mice, PrPSc was confined large- ly to the thalamus  
(Figure 9A)  as is the case for FFI in humans *7  *’8. In con- trast,   fCJD(E200K)   prions   
inoculated   into   Tg(MHu2M)   mice   produced widespread  deposition  of PrPSc  throughout  the  
cortical mantle  and  many of the deep structures of the CNS  (Figure 9B)  as is seen in fCJD 
(E200K)  of hu- mans. To examine whether the diverse patterns of PrPSc deposition  are influ- enced 
by Asn-linked glycosylation  of PrPC, we constructed Tg mice expressing PrPs mutated  at one  or 
both  of  the Asn-linked  glycosylation  consensus  sites
°”.  These mutations  resulted in  aberrant  neuroanatomic  topologies  of PrPC
within  the CNS, whereas pathologic  point mutations adjacent  to the consen- sus sites did not  
alter  the distribution  of  PrPC. Tg mice with  mutation  of  the second  PrP glycosylation  site  
exhibited  prion  incubation  times  of >500 days and  unusual  patterns  of  PrPSc  deposition.  
These  findings  raise  two  possible scenarios. First, glycosylation  can modify the conformation  
of PrPC and affect its affinity  for  a  particular  conformer  of  PrPSc, which  results  in  
specific  pat- terns of PrPSc deposition;  such interactions between  PrPSc  and PrPC are likely to 
determine  the rate of nascent PrP“ formation.  Second, glycosylation  mo- difies the stability of  
PrPSc  and hence,  the rate of PrPS° clearance.  This latter explanation  is consistent with  the  
proposal  that  the  binding  of  PrPC  to pro- tein  X  is the  rate-limiting  step  in  PrPS   
formation  under  most circumstances
255
Bcivine spongiform  encephalopathy. Prion  strains  and  the species  barrier are  of  paramount  
importance  in  understanding  the  BSE epidemic  in  Great Britain,  in which  it is estimated  
that almost one  million  cattle were  infected with  prions ”’'  *8’.  The mean  incubation  time 
for BSE is about 5 years. Most cattle therefore did not manifest disease since they were 
slaughtered between 2  and  3 years  of  age  28’.  Nevertheless,  more  than  160,000  cattle,  
primarily dairy cows,  have  died of  BSE over  the  past decade  (Figure  5A)  *7’.  BSE is a
massive common source epidemic caused by meat and bone meal (MBM) fed primarily  to  dairy  cows  
*80' *8*.  The  MBM  was  prepared  from  the  offal  of sheep,  cattle, pigs, and chickens as a 
high protein  nutritional supplement.  In the late  1970s,  the hydrocarbon-solvent extraction  
method used in the rend- ering of offal began  to be abandoned  resulting  in MBM with a much  
higher

105
































Figure 9. Regional distribution  of Pri    deposition  in kg(MHtñtM) Prn p°*° mice inoculated with 
prions from  humans who died of  inherited  prion disemes  lTable 5).  Histoblot of  Pri     
deposi- tion in a coroner section  a Tg(MHti2M)Prnp* * mouse through  the hippocampus and thnlamus
*  . (A) 4’he Tg mouse was inoculated with brain extract prepared from a patient wins died of FFI.
(B) The Tg mouse  was inoculated with .extract  from a patient with iCJD(H00F•).  Gryosiai  sec- 
tions were mottnted on nitrocellulose and treated with proteinase K to eliminate Pri        . To 
en- hance the antigenicity of Pri, the histobiots were exposed to 3 guanidinium  isothiocyanaie be- 
fore immunostaining using anti-PrP SF4 mAb '’4. (C) Labelled diagram  of a coroner sections uf the 
hippocampus/thalamus region. NC, neocortex; Hp, hippocampus;  Hb. habenula; Th, thala- mus;  vp1,  
ventral  posterior  lateral  thalamic  nucleus;  Hy,  hypothalamus,  Am, amygdata.  Phoio- 
niicrographs prepared by Stephen J.  DeArmond.

106                                      Physiology or Medicine  1997

fat content *'*. It is now thought that this change in the rendering process al- lowed  scrapie  
prions from sheep  to survive  rendering  and to be passed  into cattle. Alternatively, bovine 
prions were present at low levels prior  to modifi- cation  of  the  rendering  process  and  with  
the processing  change  survived  in sufficient  numbers  to initiate  the  BSE  epidemic  when  
inoculated  back  into cattle orally through MBM. Against the latter hypothesis is the widespread 
ge- ographical  distribution  throughout  England  of  the  initial  17  cases  of  BSE, which  
occurred  almost  simultaneously *80' 2'3, 2'⁴. Furthermore,  there  is  no evidence  of  a 
pre-existing  prion  disease  of  cattle,  either  in  Great  Britain  or elsewhere.
Origin ofBSE prions? The origin of the bovine prions causing BSE cannot be determined  by  
examining  the  amino  acid  sequence  of  PrPSc  in  cattle  with BSE since the PrPS’ in these 
animals has the bovine sequence whether the in- itial prions in MBM came from cattle or sheep. The 
bovine PrP sequence dif- fers from that of sheep at 7 or 8 positions *8    28’.  In contrast to the 
many PrP polymorphisms found in sheep, only one PrP polymorphism  has been found in  cattle. Though 
 most bovine  PrP  alleles  encode  five octarepeats,  some  en- code  six.  PrP alleles  encoding  
six octarepeats  do not seem  to be overrepre- sented in BSE (Figure 4B)  28'.
Brain  extracts  from  BSE  cattle  cause  disease  in  cattle,  sheep,  mice,  pigs, and mink 
after intracerebral  inoculation  *8“293, but prions in  brain  extracts from sheep with  scrapie  
fed  to cattle produced  illness substantially  different from  BSE °”.  However,  no exhaustive  
effort  has been  made  to test different strains of sheep prions or to examine  the disease 
following  bovine  to bovine passage.  The annual incidence  of sheep with  scrapie  in Britain  
over the past two decades has remained relatively low (J.  Wilesmith,  unpublished data). In July  
1988,  the  practice  of  feeding  MBM  to  sheep  and  cattle  was  banned. Recent statistics 
argue that the epidemic is now disappearing as a result of this ruminant feed ban  (Figure 8A) 2”,  
reminiscent of the disappearance  of kuru in the Fore people of New Guinea *4'' *5* (Figure 8B).
ñfonitoring ‹:attfefor BSE fmions. Although  many plans have been offered for the culling of older 
cattle in order to minimize  the spread of BSE *”,  it seems more  important  to  monitor  the  
frequency  of  prion  disease  in  cattle  as they are slaughtered  for human  consumption.  No 
reliable,  specific  test for prion disease  in  live  animals  is available  but immunoassays  for 
 PrPSc  in  the  brain- stems of  cattle might provide a reasonable  approach  to establishing  the 
inci- dence of subclinical  BSE  in cattle  entering  the  human  food chain "6' *08' *8’ 2’   *’7. 
Determining  how early in the incubation period PrPSc  can be detected by immunological  methods is 
now possible since a reliable bioassay has been created by expressing  the BoPrP gene in Tg mice 
*’8. Prior to development  of Tg(BoPrP) Prnp”⁰  mice,  non-Tg  mice  inoculated  intracerebrally  
with  BSE brain  extracts  required  more  than  300 days  to develop  disease  6’  °’³' ²”'  300. 
Depending  on  the  titer  of  the  inoculum,  the  structures  of  PrPC  and  PrPSc, and the 
structure of protein X, the number of inoculated animals developing disease  can vary over a wide 
range  (Table  3). Some investigators  have stated that transmission  of BSE to mice is quite 
variable with incubation  periods ex-

Stand  B.  PruMrter                                             107

ceeding one year 67 while  others report low prion  titers in BSE brain  homo-
genates *”' "'   compared to rodent brain scrapie"    '"'       '    .
Plume bonixe             been fronc»iitfed to fitunnits.° In  1994, the first cases of CJD in  
teenagers  and young  adults that were  eventually  labelled  new variant  (v) CJD occurred  in  
Britain  "'.    Besides  the young age of  these  patients  ***' *0*, the brains of these patients 
showed numerous PrP amyloid plaques surroun- ded by a halo of  intense  spongiform  degeneration  
(Figure  l0A and B)  *** Later,  one  French  case  meeting  these  criteria  followed  30’.  These 
 unusual neuropathologic  changes  have  not  been  seen  in  CJD  cases  in  the  United States,  
Australia,  or Japan     "  "'.    Both  macaque  monkeys  and  marmosets developed   neurologic  
disease  several  years  after  inoculation   with  bovine



























Figure IN. Histopathology of variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in Great Britain. (A) Section from 
frontal cortex stained by the periodic acid Schiff method showing a field with aggregates of pla- 
ques surrounded hy spongiform  degeneration.  Magnification  X  J00,  {B) Multiple plaques and 
amorphous  deposits  are  PrP  immunopositive.  Magnification  X  500.  Specimens  provided  by 
James  Ironside,  Jeanne  Bell,  and  Robert  Will;  photomicrographs  prepared   by  Stephen  J. 
DeArmond.

T08                                      Physiology or Medicine  1997

prions 30’, but only the macaques exhibited numerous PrP plaques similar to those found in vCJD"0 
(R. Ridley and H. Baker, unpublished  data) .
The  restricted  geographical   occurrence   and  chronology  of  vCJD  have raised the possibility 
that BSE prions have been  transmitted  to humans. That only -25  vCJD cases have been recorded and 
the incidence has remained rel- atively constant makes establishing the origin of vCJD difficult. 
No set of die- tary  habits  distinguishes   vCJD   patients   from   apparently   healthy  people. 
Moreover,  there is no explanation  for the predilection  of vCJD for teenagers and young adults. 
Why have older individuals not developed vCJD-based  neu- ropathologic  criteria?  It is noteworthy 
 that epidemiological studies  over  the past  three  decades  have  failed  to  find  evidence  
for  transmission  of sheep prions  to  humans  ’*'*.  Attempts  to  predict  the  future  number  
of  cases  of vCJD, assuming  exposure  to bovine  prions prior to the offal ban,  have  been 
uninformative  because  so few cases  of vCJD  have occurred  3''*313. Are we at the  beginning  of 
a human  prion  disease  epidemic  in  Britain  like  those seen for BSE and kuru (Figure 8) or 
will the number of vCJD cases remain small as
seen with iCJD caused by cadaveric  HGH *'4  *55?
Strain of BSE prions. Was a particular conformation  of bovine PrPS’ selected for heat-resistance 
during the rendering process and then reselected multiple times  as  cattle  infected  by ingesting 
 prion-contaminated MBM  were  slaugh- tered and their offal rendered into more MBM? Recent studies 
of PrPS° from brains of patients who died of vCJD show a pattern of PrP glycoforms different from 
those found for sCJD or iCJD 314' 31’. But the utility of measuring PrP gly- coforms is 
questionable in trying to relate BSE to vCJD 3'6' 3'7 because PrPS° is
formed after the protein  is glycosylated  1"   l’0 and enzymatic  deglycosylation
of PrPS’ requires denaturation  318' 3*’. Alternatively, it may be possible to estab- lish  a 
relationship  between  the  conformations  of PrPS° from  cattle  with  BSE and  those  from  
humans  with vCJD  by using  Tg  mice as was done  for strains generated  in  the brains of 
patients with FFI or fCJD *’  *".  A relationship  be- tween vCJD and BSE has been suggested by 
finding similar incubation  times in non-Tg RIII mice of -310 days after inoculation with Hu or Bo 
prions *’3.
Yeast and other prions. Although prions were originally defined in the con- text  of an  infectious 
 pathogen  5',  it  is  now  becoming  widely  accepted  that prions  are  elements  that impart 
and propagate  variability  through  multiple conformers of a normal  cellular protein.  Such a 
mechanism  must surely not be  restricted  to a single  class of transmissible  pathogens.  Indeed, 
 it is likely that the original definition will need to be extended to encompass other situ- ations 
where a similar mechanism  of information  transfer occurs.
Two  notable  prion-like  determinants,   [URE3]  and  [PSI] ,  have  already been  described in 
yeast and one in another  fungus denoted  [Het-s*]  3*   3*5 Studies of candidate  prion proteins 
in yeast may prove particularly helpful in the   dissection   of  some   of  the   events   that   
feature   in   PrPSc    formation. Interestingly,   different   strains   of  yeast   prions   have 
  been   identified   3*6 Conversion  to the prion-like  [PSI] state in yeast requires the 
molecular chap- erone Hspl04; however, no homolog of Hsp 104 has been found in mammals 3*1' 3*’.  
The  NH2-terminal   prion  domains   of  Ure2p  and  Sup35  that  are

Stand  B.  Prusiner                                                   109

responsible  for the  [URE3]  and  [PSI]  phenotypes  in yeast have  been  identi- fied.  In  
contrast  to  PrP,  which  is  a  GPI-anchored  membrane  protein,  both Ure2p  and  Sup35  are  
cytosolic  proteins  3*'.  When  the  prion  domains  of these yeast proteins were expressed in E.  
coli, the proteins were found to poly- merize into fibrils with properties similar to those of PrP 
and other amyloids
322—324
Whether  prions  explain  some  other  examples  of  acquired  inheritance  in lower organisms is 
unclear 3°’  330. For example, studies on  the inheritance  of positional  order and  cellular  
handedness  on  the  surface  of  small  organisms have   demonstrated   the   epigenetic   nature  
 of   these   phenomena   but   the mechanism  remains unclear 33'  33*.
Prevention of  and therapeutics for prion diseases. As our understanding  of prion  propagation  
increases,  it should  be  possible  to design  effective  thera- peutics. Because  people at risk 
for inherited  prion diseases can now be iden- tified decades  before  neurologic  dysfunction  is 
evident,  the development  of an  effective  therapy  for  these  fully  penetrant  disorders  is  
imperative  ³3’  33⁴. Although  we  have  no way of  predicting  the  number  of individuals  who  
may
develop neurologic dysfunction  from bovine prions in the future 31*, it would be  prudent  to seek 
an  effective  therapy now *8  33'.  Interfering  with  the  con- version  of PrPC  into PrPS° 
seems  to be  the most attractive  therapeutic  target
60. Either stabilizing  the structure of PrPC by binding a drug or modifying  the
action  of protein  X, which  might function  as a molecular  chaperone  (Figure 5B) , are 
reasonable strategies. Whether it is more efficacious to design  a drug that binds to PrPC at the 
protein  X binding site or one that mimics the struc- ture of PrPC with basic polymorphic residues 
that seem to prevent scrapie and CJD remains to be determined 1’8  232. Since PrPS’ formation seems 
limited to caveolae-like  domains  ¹⁴°*1’5' 3'6, drugs designed  to inhibit  this process  need not 
 penetrate  the  cytosol  of  cells  but  they  do  need  to  be  able  to  enter  the CNS.  
Alternatively,  drugs  that  destabilize  the  structure  of  PrPS° might  also prove useful.
The production  of domestic  animals  that do not replicate  prions may also be  important  with  
respect  to preventing  prion  disease.  Sheep encoding  the R/R  polymorphism  at  position  171  
seem  to  be  resistant  to  scrapie  ¹"    *3’' 337*343;  presumably,  this  was  the  genetic  
basis  of  Parry's  scrapie  eradication program  in Great Britain  30 years ago 44  344. A more 
effective approach  using
dominant  negatives  for producing  prion-resistant domestic  animals,  includ- ing sheep  and 
cattle,  is probably  the expression  of PrP  transgenes  encoding R17l  as well  as  additional  
basic  residues  at  the  putative  protein  X  binding site  (Figure  5B)  ”'.   Such  an  
approach  can  be  readily  evaluated  in  Tg  mice and once  shown  to be  effective,  it could  
be instituted  by artificial  insemina- tion of sperm from males homozygous for the transgene. More 
difficult is the production  of PrP-deficient  cattle  and sheep. Although  such  animals  would 
not be susceptible  to prion disease '00  '0',  they might suffer some deleterious effects from 
ablation of the PrP gene **°*2°4' *2’.
Whether  gene  therapy  for  the  human  prion  diseases  using  the  dominant negative approach 
described above for prion-resistant animals will prove fea-

110                 Physiology  or Medicine  1997

sible depends on  the availability of efficient vectors for delivery of  the trans gene to the CNS.
Concluding  remarks—looking to the future. Although  the study of  prions has taken several 
unexpected directions over the past three decades, a rather novel  and  fascinating  story  of  
prion  biology  is  emerging.  Investigations of prions  have  elucidated  a  previously  unknown  
mechanism  of  disease  in  hu- mans and animals. While learning the details of the structures of 
PrPs and de- ciphering  the  mechanism  of  PrPC  transformation  into  PrPSc will  be impor- tant, 
 the  fundamental  principles  of  prion  biology  have  become  reasonably clear. Though some 
investigators  prefer to view the composition  of the infec- tious prion particle as unresolved 33° 
’45, such a perspective denies an enlarg- ing body of data, none of which refutes the prion 
concept. Moreover, the dix covery  of  prion-like  phenomena  mediated  by  proteins  unrelated  to 
 PrP  in yeast and fungi serves not only to strengthen the prion concept but also to wi- den    it  
3*8
Hallmark   of  frion  diseases.  The  hallmark  of  all  prion  diseasewwhether sporadic, 
dominantly inherited, or acquired by infection—is  that they involve the  aberrant  metabolism  and 
 resulting  accumulation  of  the  prion  protein (Table  1) 23.  The  conversion   of  PrPC   into 
 PrPSc  involves  a  conformation change whereby the n-helical content diminishes and the amount of 
Q-sheet increases *5. These findings provide  a reasonable  mechanism  to explain  the conundrum  
presented by the three different manifestations of prion disease. Understanding  how  PrPC   
unfolds  and  refolds into  PrPSc  will  be  of  para- mount importance in transferring advances in 
the prion diseases to studies of other degenerative  illnesses. The mechanism  by which PrP    is 
formed  must involve  a templating  process whereby existing PrP’c  directs the  refolding of PrPC  
into a nascent PrPSc with the same conformation.  Not only will a knowl- edge of PrPSc formation  
help in  the  rational design  of drugs  that interrupt the pathogenesis  of  prion  diseases,  but 
it may also open  new approaches  to deciphering the causes of and  to developing effective 
therapies for the more common  neurodegenerative diseases including Alzheimer's disease,  Parkin- 
son's disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Indeed, the expanding list of prion 
diseases and their novel modes of transmission and pathogenesis (Table  1),  as well  as  the  
unprecedented  mechanisms  of  prion  propagation and information  transfer  (Tables 5 and 6), 
indicate that much more attention
to these fatal disorders of protein conformation  is urgently needed.
But prions may have even wider implications than those noted for the com- mon neurodegenerative 
diseases. If we think of prion diseases as disorders of protein  conformation  and  do  not  
require  the  diseases  to  be  transmissible, then  what we  have  learned from  the study of  
prions  may reach  far  beyond these common illnesses.
ñftiJfi  fe e    ormers. The discovery that proteins may have multiple biologi- cally active 
conformations may prove no less important than the implications of  prions  for  diseases.  How  
many  different  tertiary  structures  can  Pri adopt? This query not only addresses the issue of 
the limits of prion diversity but also applies to proteins as they normally function within the 
cell or act to

Stanley B.  Prusiner                                           111

affect  homeostasis  in  multicellular  organisms.  The  expanding  list  of chap- erones  that 
assist the folding and unfolding  of proteins promises much  new knowledge  about this process. For 
example, it is now clear that proproteases can  carry their own  chaperone  activity where  the Pro 
portion  of the protein functions as a chaperone  in  cis to guide  the folding  of the 
proteolytically ac- tive portion  before it is cleaved  3’6. Such a mechanism  might well feature 
in the  maturation   of  polypeptide   hormones.   Interestingly,  mutation   of  the chaperone  
portion  of prosubtilisin  resulted in the folding of a subtilisin  pro- tease with  different  
properties  than  the one folded  by the wild-type  chaper- one. Such chaperones have also been 
shown to work in trans 346. Besides tran- sient   metabolic   regulation   within   the   cell   
and   hormonal   regulation   of multicellular organisms, it is not unreasonable  to suggest that 
polymerization of proteins into multimeric  structures  such  as intermediate  filaments  might be 
controlled  at least in part by alternative  conformations  of proteins.  Such regulation  of 
multimeric  protein  assemblies  might  occur  either  in  the  pro-
teins  that  form  the  polymers  or  the  proteins  that  function  to  facilitate  the 
polymerization  process.  Additionally,   apoptosis  during  development   and throughout  adult 
life might also be regulated,  at least in part, by alternative tertiary structures of proteins.
5hij9ing  the  debate.  The  debate  about  prions  and  the  diseases  that  they cause has now 
shifted to such issues as how many biological processes are con- trolled by changes in protein 
conformation. Although  the extreme radiation- resistance  of the scrapie  infectivity suggested  
that the pathogen  causing  this disease and related illnesses would be different from viruses, 
viroids, and bac- teria 3* 33, few thought that alternative protein  conformations  might even re- 
motely  feature  in  the  pathogenesis  of the  prion  diseases  ”.  Indeed,  an  un- precedented  
mechanism  of  disease  has  been  revealed  where  an  aberrant conformational change  in  a 
protein  is propagated.  The discovery  of prions and  their  eventual  acceptance  by  the  
community  of scholars  represents  a triumph  of the scientific  process over prejudice.  The 
future of this new and emerging area of biology should prove even more interesting and productive 
as a multitude of unpredicted discoveries emerge.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
I  thank        Abramsky,  M.  Baldwin,  R.  Barry,  C.  Bellinger,  D.  Borchelt,  D. Burton, D. 
Butler,  G. Carlson, J   Cleaver, F. Cohen, C. Cooper,  S. DeArmond,
T.  Diener, J.   Dyson,  S.  Farr-Jones,  R.  Fletterick,  R.  Gabizon,  D.  Groth,  C.
Heinrich,  L. Hood,  K. Hsiao,  Z.  Huang,  T. James,  K.  Kaneko,  R.  Kohler,  T. Kitamoto, H. 
Kretzschmar, V. Lingappa,  H. Liu, D. Lowenstein, M. McKinley,
Z. Meiner, B. Miller, W. Mobley, B. Oesch, K.-M. Pan, D. Peretz, D. Riesner, G. Roberts, J.  Safar, 
 M. Scott, A.  Serban,  N. Stahl, A. Taraboulos, J.  Tateishi,  M. Torchia,  P.  Tremblay,  M. Vey, 
C. Weissmann,  D. Westaway,  A. Williamson,  P. Wright, and L. Zullianello for their contributions  
to many phases of these stu- dies, and H. Baron, W. Burke, I. Diamond, H. Fields, R. Fishman,  D, 
Gilden,
S. Hauser,  H. Koprowski, J.  Krevans, J.  Martin,  M. McCarty,  R. C. Morris,  N.

1 T2                                      Physiology  or  Medicine  1997

Nathanson,  F.  Seitz,  and  C. Yanofsky  for support  and  encouragement.  This research  was  
supported  by grants  from  the  National  Institute  of  Aging  and the  National  Institute  of  
Neurologic  Diseases  and  Stroke  of  the  National Institutes of Health,  the National  Science  
Foundation,  International  Human Frontiers    of    Science    Program,    and    the   American   
 Health    Assistance Foundation  as well  as  by gifts  from  the  Sherman  Fairchild  Foundation, 
 the Keck   Foundation,   the   G.  Harold   and  Leila  Y.  Mathers   Foundation,   the Bernard  
Osher  Foundation,  the John  D.  French  Foundation,  the  Howard Hughes  Medical  Institute,  
R.J. Reynolds,  National  Medical  Enterprises,  and Centeon.


REFERENCES
1.  Meggendorfer  F.:  Klinische  und  genealogische  Beobachtungen  bei  einem  Fall  von 
spastischer  Pseudosklerose Jakobs.  Z. Cesamte Neurol.  Psychiatr.  128:337—341,  1930. Stender  
A.:  Weitere  Beitrage  zum  Kapitel   “Spastische   Pseudosklerose  Jakobs”.   Z. Cesamte Neurol.  
Psychiatr  128:528—543,  1930.
3.  Masters C.L.,  Gajdusek  D.C., and Gibbs C.J., Jr.: Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease virus  isola- 
tions from  the Gerstmann-Straussler syndrome. Brain 104:559—588,  1981.
4.  Hsiao K,  Baker H.F., Crow T.J., Poulter M., Owen F., Terwilliger J  D., Westaway D., Ott J.,  
and  Prusiner  S.B.:  Linkage  of  a  prion  protein  missense  variant  to  Gerstmann- Straussler 
syndrome.  Nature 338:342—345,  1989.
5.  Prusiner S.B.: Scrapie  prions.  Annu. Re-u.  Microbiol.  43:345—374,  1989.
6.  Kirschbaum  W.R.: Jakob-Cieutzfeldt Disease,  Elsevier, Amsterdam,  1968.
7.  Gibbs  C.J., Jr.,  Gajdusek  D.C.,  Asher  D.M.,  Alpers  M.P.,  Beck  E.,  Daniel  P.M.,  and 
Matthews W.B.: Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease  (spongiform  encephalopathy): transmission to the 
chimpanzee.  Science 161:388—389,  1968.
8.  Prusiner  S.B.: The prion diseases.  Sci.  Am.  272:48—57,  1995.
9.  Malmgren  R., Kurland L., Mokri B., and Kurtzke J.:  The epidemiology of Creutzfeldt- Jakob 
disease.  Slow Transmissible  Diseases  of the Nervous  System,  Vol.  1. Prusiner  S.B. and Hadlow 
W.J., Eds. Academic  Press, New York,  1979 pp. 93—112.
10   Brown  P., Cathala F., Raubertas R.F., Gajdusek  D.C., and Castaigne  P.: The epidemio- logy 
of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease: conclusion of 15-year investigation  in France and re- view of the 
world literature. Neurology  37:895—904,  1987.
11.  Harries-Jones  R.,  Knight  R.,  Will  R.G.,  Cousens  S.,  Smith  P.G.,  and  Matthews  W.B.: 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob  disease  in  England  and  Wales,  1980—1984:  a  case-control  study  of 
potential  risk factors. J.  Neurol.  Neurosurg.  Psychiatr y 51: 1113—1119,  1988.
12.  Cousens  S.N., Harries-J   nes R., Knight R., Will R.G.,  Smith  P.G.,  and Matthews  W.B.: 
Geographical  distribution  of cases of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in England and Wales 1970—84.     
Neurol.  Neurosurg.  Ps  chiatr   53:459—465,  1990.
13   Kahana E., Milton A., Braham J.,  and Sofer D.: Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease: focus among Libyan 
Jews in Israel.  Science 183:90—91,  1974.
14.  Goldfarb  L.,  Korczyn  A., Brown  P.,  Chapman J.,  and Gajdusek  D.C.:  Mutation  in  co- 
don  200  of scrapie  amyloid  precursor  gene  linked  to  Creutzfeldt-Jakob  disease  in 
Sephardic Jews of Libyan  and non-Libyan  origin. Lancet  336:637—638,  1990.
m.   Hsiao  K,   Meiner   Z.,   Kahana   E.,  Cass  C.,  Kahana  I.,  Avrahami   D.,   Scarlato   
G., Abramsky O., Prusiner S.B., and Gabizon  R.: Mutation  of the prion  protein  in Libyan Jews 
with Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.  N.  Engl. ].  Med.  324: 1091-1097,  1991.
16.  Gabizon  R., Rosenmann  H., Meiner  Z., Kahana I., Kahana  E., Shugart Y.,  Ott J.,  and 
Prusiner  S.B.:  Mutation  and polymorphism  of the  prion  protein gene in Libyan Jews with 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.  Am. ].  Hum.  Cenet.  53:828—835,  1993.

Stand  B.  Prusiner                                                   113
17.  Sigurdsson  B.: Rida,  a chronic  encephalitis  of sheep  with  general  remarks  on  infec- 
tions  which   develop   slowly  and   some   of  their   special   characteristics.  Br.   Vet.   
]. I 10:341—354,  1954.
18.  Hadlow W.J.: Scrapie and kuru. Lancet 2:289—290,  1959.
19.  Gajdusek  D.C.,  Gibbs  C.J    Jr., and  Alpers  M.:  Experimental  transmission  of a kuru- 
like syndrome  to chimpanzees.  Nature 209:794-796,  1966.
20.  Klatzo I., Gajdusek D.C., and Zigas V.: Pathology of kuru. Lab. Invest. 8:799—847,  1959.
21.  Zlotnik I. and Stamp J.L.: Scrapie disease of sheep.  lYorfd Neurology  2:895—907,  1961.
22.  Masters   C.L.   and   Richardson    E.P.,   Jr.:   Subacute   spongiform    encephalopathy 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob  disease—the  nature  and  progression  of spongiform  change.  Brain 
101:333—344,  1978.
23.  Prusiner S.B.: Molecular biology of prion diseases.  Science 252:1515—1522, 1991.
24.  Wells  G.A.H.,  Scott  A.C.,  Johnson  C.T.,  Gunning  R.F.,  Hancock  R.D.,  Jeffrey  M., 
Dawson M., and Bradley R.: A novel progressive spongiform  encephalopathy in cat8e. Vet. &c.   
121:419—420,  1987.
as. Pan  K-M.,  Baldwin  M.,  Nguyen  J.,   Gasset  M.,  Serban  A.,  Groth  D.,  Mehlhorn  I.,
Huang  Z., Fletterick  R.J., Cohen  F.E., and Prusiner  S.B.: Conversion  of ct-helices into 
Q-sheets  features  in  the formation  of the scrapie  prion  proteins.  Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci. 
USA 90:10962—10966,  1993.
26.  Bessen  R.A.  and  Marsh  R.F.:  Distinct  PrP  properties  suggest  the  molecular  basis  of 
strain variation  in transmissible  mink encephalopathy. J.  Virol. 68:7859—7868,  1994.
27.  Telling   G.C.,   Parchi   P.,   DeArmond   S.J.,   Cortelli   P.,   Montagna   P.,   Gabizon  
 R., Mastrianni I    Lugaresi E., Gambetti P., and Prusiner S.B.: Evidence  for the conforma- tion  
of  the  pathologic  isoform  of the  prion  protein  enciphering  and  propagating
prion diversity.  Science 274:2079—2082, 1996.

28.
29.


50
Prusiner S.B.: Prion diseases and the BSE crisis.  Spence 278:245—25I,  1997.
Dlouhy  S.R.,  Hsiao K., Farlow M.R.,  Foroud T., Conneally P.M.. J   hnson  P., Prusiner S.B.,  
Hodes  M.E.,  and  Ghetti  B.:  Linkage  of  the  Indiana  kindred  of  Gerstmann- 
Straussler-Scheinker disease to the prion protein gene. Nat.  Cenet.  1:64—67,  1992.
Petersen R.B., Tabaton M., Berg L., Schrank B., Torack R.M., Leal S., Julien J., Vital C., 
Deleplanque  B.,  Pendlebury  W.W.,  Drachman  D.,  Smith  T.W.,  Martin J.J.,  Oda  M., Montagna 
P., Ott J.,  Autilio-Gambetti L., Lugaresi E., and Gambetti P.: Analysis of the prion  protein gene 
in  thalamic dementia. Neurology  42:1859—1863,  1992.
31. Poulter  M.,  Baker  H.F.,  Frith  C.D.,  Leach  M.,  Lofthouse  R.,  Ridley  R.M.,  Shah  T., 
Owen F., Collinge J.,  Brown  G., HardyJ    Mullan M.J., Harding A.E., Bennett C., Doshi R.,  and  
Crow  T.J.:  Inherited  prion  disease  with   144  base  pair  gene  insertion.   1. Genealogical 
and molecular studies.  Brain 115:675—685,  1992.
32.  Alper  T.,  Haig  D.A.,  and  Clarke  M.C.:  The  exceptionally  small  size  of the  scrapie 
agent.  Biochem.  Biophys.  Res.  Commun.  22:278—284,  1966.
33. Alper T., Cramp W.A., Haig D.A., and Clarke M.C.: Does the agent of scrapie replicate without 
nucleic acid? Natvre 214:764-766,  1967.
34.  Latarjet R., Muel B., Haig D.A., Clarke M.C., and Alper T.: Inactivation  of the scrapie agent 
by near monochromatic  ultraviolet light. Nature 227: I341—1343,  1970.
35. Gibbs C.j., Jr., Gajdusek D.C., and Latarjet R.: Unusual resistance to ionizing radiation of   
the   viruses   of   kuru,   Creutzfeldt-Jakob   diseas.    f'roc.   Natl.    Acad.    Sci.    USA 
75:6268—6270,  1978.

36.


37.
Pattison  I.H.:  Experiments  with  scrapie  with  special  reference  to  the  nature  of  the
agent  and  the  pathology  of  the  disease.  Sloni,  Latent  and  Temperate   Virus  Infections, 
NINDB   Monograph   2.  Gajdusek   D.C.,   Gibbs  C.I  .  Jr.,  and  Alpers   M.P.,   Eds.   U.S. 
Government  Printing, Washington,  D.C.,  1965 pp. 249—257.
Griffith J.S.: Self-replication and scrapie. Nature 215: l04W1044,  1967.
38.  Pattison  I.H. and Jones K.M.: The  possible  nature  of  the  transmissible  agent of scra- 
pie. Vet. fi'es. 80: 1—8,  1967.
39.  Gibbons R.A.  and  Hunter  G.D.:  Nature  of the  scrapie  agent.  Nature 215: 1041—1043, 
196’7.

114                                        Physiology or Medicine  1997

40.  Hunter  G.D.,  Kimberlin  R.H., and  Gibbons  R.A.: Scrapie: a modified  membrane  hy- 
pothesis./.  Tim: Biol. 20:355—357, 1968.
41.  Field E.J., Farmer F., Caspary E.A., and  Joyce G.: Susceptibility of scrapie agent  to io- 
nizing radiation.  Nature 222:90-91,  1969.
42.  Hunter G.D.: Scrapie: a prototype slow infection. /.  Infect. Dis.  I 25:427—440, 1972.
43.  Gordon W.S.: Advances in veterinary research. Vet. As.   58:SU—520, 1946.
44.  Parry   H.B.:   Scrapie:   a   transmissible   and   hereditary   disease   of   sheep.   
Heredi}
17:75—105, 1962.
45.  Dickinson A.G., Young G.B., Stamp J.T., and  Renwick C.C.: An analysis of natural scra- pie in 
Suffolk sheep. heredity 20:48a-503,  1965.
46.  Parry  H.B.:  Recorded  occurrences  of  scrapie  from  1750.  Scrapie  Disease  iii  Sheep.
Oppenheimer  D.R., Ed. Academic Press, New York, 1983 pp. 31—59.
47   Prusiner S.B.: An approach  to the isolation of biological  particles using sedimentation 
analysis. /.  Biol. Chem. 253:916—92l,  1978.
48.  Prusiner S.B.,  Garfin  D.E.,  Baringer J.R.,  Cochran  S.P.,  Hadlow W.J.,  Race  R.E., and 
Eklund  C.M.:  Evidence  for  multiple  molecular  forms of  the  scrapie  agent.  Persistent
Viruses. Stevens J    Todaro G., and  Fox C.F.,  Eds. Academic  Press, New York, 1978 pp.
591—613.
49.  Prusiner S.B.: Prions.  SP. Am.  251:50—59,  1984.
50.  Chandler R.L.: Experimental  scrapie in  the mouse. As. Vet.  Sci. 4:276—285,  1963.
51.  Prusiner S., Davis J.N., and Stadtman  E.R.: Regulation  of glutaminase  B in Escherichia 
coli. I. Purification,  properties,  and cold liability. J.  Biol.  Chem.  251:3447—3456, 1976.

52

53.
Prusiner S.B., Hadlow W.J., Eklund C.M., and Race R.E.: Sedimentation  properties of the scrapie 
agent. Proc. Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  t/SA 74:465€›-4660,  1977.
Marsh  R.F.  and  Kimberlin  R.H.:  Comparison  of scrapie  and  transmissible  mink  en- 
cephalopathy in hamsters.  II. Clinical signs, pathology and pathogenesis. J.  Infect. Dis. 
131:104-110,  1975.
64.  Kimberlin  R. and Walker C.: Characteristics of a short incubation  model of scrapie  in
the golden  hamster. /.  Gen.  ViroJ. 34:295—304,  1977.
ss. Prusiner  S.B.,  Groth  D.F.,  Cochran  S.P.,  Masiarz  F.R.,  McKinley  M.P.,  and  Martinez
H.M.: Molecular properties, partial purification, and assay by incubation period meas- urements of 
the hamster scrapie agent.  Biochemistry  19:4883-4891,  1980.
56.  Prusiner  S.B.,  Cochran  S.P.,  Groth  D.F.,  Downey  D.E.,  Bowman  KA.,  and  Martinez 
H.M.: Measurement of the scrapie agent using an incubation  time interval assay.  Ann. Neurol.  1 
I:35   -358, 1982.
57. Zlotnik  I.:  Experimental  transmission  of scrapie  to  golden  hamsters.  Lancet  2: 1072, 
1963.
58.  Prusiner    S.B.:   Novel   proteinaceous    infectious   particles   cause   scrapie.    
Science
216: l3fi—144,  1982.
59.  Stahl  N.,  Baldwin  M.A.,  Teplow  D.B.,  Hood  L.,  Gibson  B.W.,  Burlingame  A.L.,  and 
Prusiner S.B.: Structural analysis of the scrapie prion protein using mass spectrometry and amino 
acid sequencing.  Biochemistry  32: 1991—2002,  1993.
60.  Cohen  F.E.,  Pan  K-M.,  Huang  Z.,  Baldwin  M.,  Fletterick  R.J.,  and  Prusiner  S.B.: 
Structural  clues  to prion  replication.  Science 264:530—531,  1994.
61.  Prusiner S.B., Groth D., Serban A., Stahl N., and Gabizon R.: Attempts to restore scra- pie  
prion  infectivity  after  exposure  to protein  denaturants.  Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  USA 
90:279   -2797,  1993.
62.  Carp R.I., Kascsak R.J., Rubenstein  R., and Merz P.A.: The puzzle of PrP    and infecti-
vity—do  the pieces fit? Trends Neurosci.  17:148—149,  1994.
63. Manuelidis  L.  and Fritch  W.: Infectivity  and  host responses  in  Creutzfeldt-Jakob dis- 
ease. Virolo     216:4b—59,  1996.
64.  Narang H.: The nature of the scrapie agent:  the virus theory. f'roc.  Soc. Exp.  Biol. Med.
212:208—224,  1996.
65.  Ozel  M.,  Baldauf E.,  Beekes  M.,  and  Diringer  H.:  Small  viru+like  particles  in  
trans- missible      spongiform      encephalopathies.      Transmissible       Subacute       
Spongiform

Stand  B.  Prusiner

Encephalopathies: Prion Diseases.  Court  L.  and  Dodet  B.,  Eds.  Elsevier,  Paris,  1996  pp. 
369—373.
66.  Caughey  B. and  Chesebro  B.:  Prion  protein  and  the  transmissible  spongiform  en- 
cephalopathies. Trends  Cell Biol. 7:56—62,  1997.
67.  Lasmézas  C.I.,  Deslys J.-P.,  Robain  O., Jaegly A.,  Beringue  V.,  Peyrin J.-M.,  Fournier 
J.-G., HauwJ.-J., RossierJ., and Dormont D.: Transmission  of the BSE agent to mice in the absence 
of detectable abnormal prion  protein.  Science 275:402—405,  1997.
68.  Diener T.O., McKinley M.P., and Prusiner S.B.: Viroids and prions. f'roc. Natl. Acad.  Sci. 
USA 79:5220—5224,  1982.
69.  Chamberlin  T.C.:  The  method  of multiple  working  hypotheses.   Sclerite  [Old  Series]
15:92—97,  1890.
70.  Avery  O.T.,  MacLeod  C.M.,  and  McCarty  M.:  Studies on  the  chemical  nature  of the 
substance  inducing  transformation of pneumococcal  types. Induction  of transforma- tion by a 
deoxyribonucleic acid fraction  isolated from pneumococcus  type III. /. ñx§. Med.  79:137—157,  
1944.
7l.    Stanley W.M.: The  “undiscovered” discovery.  Arch. Enuiron.  Health 21:256-262,  1970.
72.  McCarty  M.:  The Transforming Principle:  Discovering that  Genes  Are Made  of DNA, W. W.
Norton & Co., New York,  1985.
73   Hershey A.D. and Chase M.: Independent  functions of viral protein  and nucleic acid in growth 
of bacteriophage./.  Gen. Physiol.  36:39-56,  1952.
74.  Watson J.D.  and Crick F.H.C.:  Genetical  implication  of  the structure  of deoxyribose 
nucleic acid. Nature 111:964-967,  1953.
75.  Mirsky A.E. and Pollister A.W.: Chromosin,  a desoxyribose  nucleoprotein  complex of the cell 
nucleus. /.  Gen. Physiol.  30:l34—135,  1946.
76.  Diener T.O.: Viroids and  Yiroid Diseases  J   hn Wiley,  New York,  1979.
77.  Fraenkel-Conrat H. and Williams R.C.: Reconstitution of active tobacco virus from the
inactive  protein  and nucleic  acid components.  Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  USA 41:690—698, 1955.
78.  Gierer A. and Schramm  G.: Infectivity of ribonucleic acid from  tobacco mosaic virus.
Nature 177:702—703,  1956.
79.  Bolton D.C., McKinley M.P., and Prusiner S.B.: Identification of a protein  that purifies with 
 the scrapie prion.  Science 218:1309-1311, 1982.
80.  Prusiner  S.B.,  Bolton  D.C.,  Groth  D.F.,  Bowman  KA.,  Cochran  S.P.,  and  McKinley 
M.P.:   Further   purification    and   characterization   of   scrapie   prions.   Biochemistry 
21:6942—6950,  1982.
81   Prusiner  S.B.,  Groth  D.F.,  Bolton  D.C.,  Kent  S.B.,  and   Hood  L.E.:  Purification  
and structural studies of a major scrapie prion  protein.  Cell 38:127—134, 1984.
82.  Basler  K.,  Oesch  B., Scott  M., Westaway  D.,  Walchli  M.,  Groth  D.F.,  McKinley  M.P., 
Prusiner  S.B.,  and  Weissmann  C.: Scrapie  and  cellular  PrP isoforms are  encoded  by the  
same chromosomal gene. Cell 46:4l7—428, 1986.
83.  Chesebro  B.,  Race  R.,  Wehrly  K.,  Nishio J.,  Bloom  M.,  Lechner  D.,  Bergstrom  S., 
Robbins  K,  Mayer  L.,  Keith J.M.,  Garon  C.,  and  Haase  A.:  Identification  of  scrapie 
prion   protein-specific   mRNA   in   scrapie-infected   and   uninfected    brain.   Nature 
315:331—333,  1985.
84.  Oesch  B., Westaway  D., Walchli  M., McKinley M.P.,  Kent S.B.H., Aebersold  R., Barry R.A., 
Tempst P., Teplow D.B., Hood  L.E., Prusiner S.B., and  Weissmann  C.: A cellular gene encodes 
scrapie PrP 27—30  protein. Cell 40:735—746, 1985.
85.  Meyer  R.K, McKinley M.P.,  Bowman  KA., Braunfeld  M.B.,  Barry R.A., and   Prusiner S.B.: 
Separation and properties of cellular and scrapie prion proteins. f'roc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 
83:2310—2314,  1986.
86.  Locht C., Chesebro  B., Race  R., and  Keith J.M.: Molecular  cloning and  complete  se- 
quence  of  prion  protein  cDNA from  mouse  brain  infected  with  the  scrapie  agent. Proc. 
Natl. Acad.  Sci. USA 83:6372—6376, 1986.
87.  Bendheim  P.E., Barry R.A., DeArmond  S.J., Stites D.P., and  Prusiner S.B.: Antibodies to a 
scrapie prion  protein.  Nature 310:4l8—421,  1984.

116                                   Physiolo  ff   or     Medicine  1997

88.  Bockman  J.M.,  Kingsbury  D.T.,  McKinley  M.P.,  Bendheim  P.E.,  and  Prusiner  S.B.: 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease prion  proteins in  human brains. N.  Engl. J.  Med. 312:75—78, 1985.
89.  Brown  P.,  Coker-Vann  M.,  Pomeroy  K.,  Franko  M.,  Asher  D.M.,  Gibbs  C.J., Jr.,  and 
Gajdusek  D.C.: Diagnosis of  Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease  by Western  blot identification of marker 
protein in human  brain tissue. N. Engl. J.  Med.  314:547—551,  1986.
90.  Bockman  J.M.,  Prusiner  S.B.,  Tateishi J.,   and  Kingsbury  D.T.:  Immunoblotting  of 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob  disease  prion  proteins:  host species-specific epitopes.  Ann.  Neurol. 
21:S89—595,  198‘7.
91.  Manuelidis   L.,  Valley  S.,  and  Manuelidis   E.E.:  Specific   proteins   associated   
with Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and scrapie share antigenic and carbohydrate  determinants. Proc. 
Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  USA 82:426a-4267,  1985.
92.  Prusiner S.B.: Prions and neurodegenerative diseases. N. Engl.]. Med. 317: 1571—1581, 1987.
93.  Manuelidis L., Tesin D.M.,  Sklaviadis T., and Manuelidis  E.E.: Astrocyte gene  expre+ sion 
in Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.  f'roc. Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  USA 84:5937—594l,  1987.
94.  Gomi H., Yokoyama T., Fujimoto K,  Ikeda T., Katoh A., Itoh T., and Itohara S.: Mice devoid  
of the  glial  fibrillary  acidic  protein  develop  normally  and are  susceptible  to scrapie 
prions. Neuron 14:29—41,  1995.
95.  Tatzelt  j.,   Maeda  N.,  Pekny  M.,  Yang  S.-L.,  Betsholtz  C.,  Eliasson  C.,  Cayetano  
J., Camerino A.P., DeArmond  S.J., and Prusiner S.B.: Scrapie in mice deficient in apoli- poprotein 
 E or glial fibrillary acidic protein. Neurology  47:449—453,  1996.
96.  Duguid  J.R.,  Rohwer  R.G.,  and  Seed  B.:  Isolation  of  cDNAs  of  scrapie-modulated RNAs 
  by  subtractive   hybridization   of  a  cDNA  library.   Doc.  Natl.   Acad.   Sci.   USA 
85:573&-5742,  1988.
97.  Duguidj.R., Bohmont C.W., Liu N., and Tourtellotte W.W.: Changes in brain gene ex- pression   
shared   by   scrapie   and   Alzheimer   disease.   f'roc.   Nett.   Acad.    Sci.   USA 
86:7260—7264,  1989.
98.  Diedrich §.F., Carp R.I., and Haase A.T.: Increased expression  of heat shock  protein, 
transferrin,  and by-microglobulin  in  astrocytes during  scrapie.  Microbial.  Pathogenesis 
15:1—6,  1993.
99.  Akowitz A.,  Sklaviadis  T.,  and  Manuelidis  L.: Endogenous  viral  complexes  with  long
RNA  cosediment   with   the   agent  of  Creutzfeldt-Jakob  disease.   Nucleic   Acids   Res.
22:1101—1107,  1994.
100.  Biieler H., Aguzzi A., Sailer A., Greiner R.-A., Autenried P., Aguet M., and Weissmann C.: 
Mice devoid of PrP are resistant to scrapie.  Grff 73: 1339—1347,  1993.
101.  Prusiner S.B., Groth D., Serban A., Koehler R., Foster D., Torchia M., Burton D., Yang S.-L., 
and DeArmond  S.J.: Ablation  of the prion  protein  (PrP) gene in mice prevents scrapie  and  
facilitates  production  of  anti-PrP  antibodies.  Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  USA 90:1060&-10612, 
1993.
102.  Manson J.C., Clarke A.R., McBride P.A., McConnell  I., and Hope J.:  PrP gene dosage 
determines  the  timing  but not the final intensity or distribution  of lesions in scrapie 
pathology. Nnirodegeneration 3:331—340,  1994.
103.  Sailer  A.,  Biieler  H.,  Fischer  M.,  Aguzzi  A.,  and  Weissmann  C.:  No  propagation  
of prions in mice devoid of PrP.  Crff 77:967—968,  1994.
104   Sakaguchi  S.,  Katamine  S.,  Shigematsu  K.,  Nakatani  A.,  Moriuchi  R.,  Nishida  N., 
Kurokawa  K,   Nakaoke  R.,  Sato  H., Jishage  K,  Kuno J.,  Noda  T.,  and  Miyamoto  T.: 
Accumulation  of  proteinase  K-resistant  prion  protein  (PrP)  is  restricted  by  the  ex- 
pression  level  of normal  PrP  in  mice  inoculated  with  a mouse-adapted  strain  of the 
Creutzfeldt—Jakob disease agent./.  Virof. 69:7586—7592,  1995.
105.  Gabizon  R.,  McKinley  M.P.,  Groth  D.F.,  and Prusiner  S.B.:  Immunoaffinity purifica- 
uon   and   neutralization   of  scrapie   prion   infectivity.   foe.   Natl.    Acad.   Sci.   
USA 85:6617—6621,  1988.
106.  McKinley M.P., Bolton D.C., and Prusiner S.B.: A protease-resistant protein  is a struc- 
tural component of the scrapie prion.  Cell 35:57—62,  1983.

Stanley B.  Prusiner                                            117

107.  Prusiner S.B., McKinley M.P., Bowman  K.A., Bolton  D.C., Bendheim  P.E., Groth  D.F., and  
Glenner  G.G.:  Scrapie  prions aggregate  to  form  amyloid-like  birefringent  rods. Cell 
35:349—358,  1983.
108.  Bolton D.C., McKinley M.P., and Prusiner S.B.: Molecular  characteristics of the major 
scrapie prion  protein. Biochemistry  23:5898—5906,  1984.
109.  Riesner  D.,  Kellings  K.,  Post  K,  Wille  H.,  Serban  H.,  Groth  D.,  Baldwin  M.A.,  
and Prusiner  S.B.:  Disruption  of prion  rods  generates  10-nm  spherical  particles  having 
high n-helical content and lacking scrapie infectivity. J.  Vzrof. 70:1714—l722,  1996.
110.  Bellinger-Kawahara C., Cleaver J.E., Diener T.O., and Prusiner  S.B.: Purified scrapie prions 
resist inactivation  by UV irradiation. J.  Virol. 61: 159—166,  1987.
111.  Bellinger-Kawahara  C.,  Diener  T.O.,  McKinley  M.P.,  Groth  D.F.,  Smith  D.R.,  and 
Prusiner S.B.: Purified scrapie prions resist inactivation  by procedures  that hydrolyze, modify, 
or shear nucleic acids. Virology  160:271—274,  1987.
112.  Bellinger-Kawahara  C.G.,  Kempner  E.,  Groth  D.F.,  Gabizon  R..  and  Prusiner  S.B.: 
Scrapie   prion   liposomes   and   rods   exhibit   target   sizes   of   55,000   Da.   Virology 
164:537—541,  t988.
113.  Kellings  K,  Meyer N., Mirenda  C., Prusiner  S.B., and Riesner  D.: Further analysis  of 
nucleic  acids in  purified scrapie  prion  preparations  by improved  return  refocussing gel 
electrophoresis (RRGE) . J.  Gen. Virol. 73: 1025—1029,  1992.
114.  Kellings  K.,  Prusiner  S.B.,  and Riesner  D.:  Nucleic  acids  in  prion  preparations:  
un- specific background  or essential component?  Phil. Trans. R.  Soc. Loud. B 343:425—430, 1994.
115.  Manuelidis L., Sklaviadis T., Akowitz A., and Fritch W.: Viral particles are required for 
infection  in  neurodegenerative  Creutzfeld t-Jakob  disease.  Proc.  Natl.  Acad.   Sci.  USA 
92:5l24—5l28,  1995.
116.  Williams R.C.: Electron  microscopy of viruses.  Ads.  Virus Res.  2: 183—239,  1954.
117.  Cohen A.S.,  Shirahama  T., and Skinner  M.: Electron  microscopy  of  amyloid. Electron 
Microscof   of  Proteins,   Vol.   3.  Harris J.R.,  Ed.  Academic  Press,  New  York,  1982  pp. 
I65—206.
118.  DeArmond   S.J.,  McKinley  M.P.,  Barry  R.A.,  Braunfeld  M.B.,  McColloch  J.R.,  and 
Prusiner S.B.: Identification of prion  amyloid filaments in scrapie-infected brain.  Cell 
41:221—235,  1985.
119.  Kitamoto  T.,  Tateishi  J.,   Tashima  I.,  Takeshita  I.,  Barry  R.A.,  DeArmond  S.J.,  
and Prusiner  S.B.: Amyloid  plaques  in  Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease  stain  with  prion  protein 
antibodies.  Ann. Neurol.  20:204—208,  1986.
120.  Roberts G.W., Lofthouse R., Brown R., Crow T.J., Barry R.A., and Prusiner S.B.: Prion- 
protein   immunoreactivity   in   human   transmissible   dementias.   N.    Engl.   J.    Med. 
315:123I—1233,  1986.
121.  Gabizon R., McKinley M.P., and Prusiner S.B.: Purified prion  proteins and scrapie  in- 
fectivity copartition  into liposomes. Proc. Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  USA 84:4017—4021,  1987.
122.  McKinley  M.P.,  Meyer  R.,  Kenaga  L.,  Rahbar  F.,  Cotter  R.,  Serban  A.,  and  
Prusiner S.B.:  Scrapie  prion  rod  formation   in  ettro  requires  both  detergent  extraction  
and limited proteolysis. J.  Virol. 65: 1440—1449,  1991.
123.  Diringer H., Gelderblom  H., Hilmert H., Ozel M., Edelbluth  C., and Kimberlin  R.H.: Scrapie 
infectivity, fibrils and low molecular weight protein. Nature 306:47b—478,  1983.
124.  Merz  P.A.,  Kascsak  R.J.,  Rubenstein  R.,  Carp  R.I.,  and  Wisniewski  H.M.: Antisera  
to scrapie-associated fibril  protein  and prion  protein  decorate  scrapie-associated fibrils.
}.  Strol. 61:42-49,  1987.
125.  Diener T.O.: PrP and the nature of the scrapie agent.  Cell 49:719—721,  1987.
126.  Merz P.A., Somerville R.A., Wisniewski H.M., and Iqbal K:  Abnormal fibrils from scra- 
pie-infected brain.  Acta Neuropathol.  {Berl.)  54:63—74,  1981.
127.  Merz P.A., Wisniewski  H.M.,  Somerville  R.A.,  Bobin  S.A.,  Masters  C.L., and Iqbal  K.: 
Ultrastructural morphology of amyloid fibrils from  neuritic and amyloid plaques.  Acta 
Neuropathol.  (Berl.) 60: 113-124,  1983.
128.  Merz P.A., Rohwer R.G., Kascsak R., Wisniewski  H.M., Somerville  R.A., Gibbs C.J., Jr.,

118                                   Physiology  or  Medicine  1997

and Gajdusek D.C.: Infection-specific particle from the unconventional slow virus dix eases.  
Science 225:437—440,  1984.
129.  Diringer   H.:   Transmissible    spongiform    encephalopathies   (TSE)    virus-induced 
amyloidoses  of the central nervous system  (CNS) . ñur /. Epidemiol.  7:562—566,  1991.
130.  Bastian  F.O.: Bovine spongiform  encephalopathy: relationship  to human disease and nature 
of the agent.  ASM Neues 59:235-240,  1993.
131.  Kimberlin   R.H.:   Scrapie   and   possible   relationships   with   viroids.   Semin.    
Virol.
1:15E162,  1990.
132.  Chesebro  B.  and Caughey  B.:  Scrapie  agent  replication  without  the  prion  protein?
Curr. Biol. 3:696—698,  1993.
133.  Scott  M.,  Groth  D.,  Foster  D.,  Torchia  M.,  Yang  S.-L.,  DeArmond  S.J.,  and  
Prusiner S.B.: Propagation of prions with artificial properties in transgenic mice expressing chi- 
meric PrP genes.  Celt 73:979—988,  1993.
134.   Telling G.C., Scott M., Mastrianni J.,  Gabizon  R., Torchia M., Cohen  F.E., DeArmond S.J., 
 and  Prusiner  S.B.:  Prion  propagation  in  mice  expressing  human  and  chimeric PrP  
transgenes  implicates  the  interaction  of cellular  PrP  with  another  protein.  Cell 83:79—90, 
 1995.
135.  Scott M.R., Groth D., TatzeltJ., Torchia M., Tremblay P., DeArmond S.j., and Prusiner S.B.: 
Propagation of prion strains through specific conformers of the prion protein./. Virol. 
71:9032—9044,  1997.
136.  Anfinsen   C.B.:   Principles   that   govern    the   folding   of   protein    chains.    
Science
181:223—230,  1973.
137.  Pergami P., Jaffe H., and Safar J:    Semipreparative chromatographic method to purify the   
normal   cellular  isoform  of  the  prion   protein   in  nondenatured   form.   Anal. Bioch     . 
236:63—73,  1996.
138.  Borchelt D.R., Scott M., Taraboulos A., Stahl N., and Prusiner S.B.: Scrapie and cellu- lar 
prion proteins differ in their kinetics of synthesis and topology in cultured cells. J. Well Biol. 
110:74W752,  1990.
139.  Stahl N., Borchelt D.R., Hsiao K,  and Prusiner  S.B.: Scrapie prion  protein  contains a 
phosphatidylinositol glycolipid.  Cell 51:229—240,  1987.
140.  Caughey B. and Raymond  G.J.: The scrapie-associated form of PrP is made from a cell surface  
precursor  that  is  both  protease-  and  phospholipase-sensitive. J.   Biol.  Chem. 
266:1821’7—18223,  1991.
141.  Borchelt  D.R.,  Taraboulos  A.,  and  Prusiner  S.B.:  Evidence  for  s    thesis  of  
scrapie prion proteins in the endocytic pathway. /. Biol.  Chem.  267: I6188—16199,  1992.
142.  Taraboulos  A.,  Scott  M.,  Semenov  A.,  Avrahami  D.,  Laszlo  L.,  and  Prusiner  S.B.: 
Cholesterol depletion and modification  of COOH-terminal  targeting sequence of the prion protein 
inhibits formation  of the scrapie isoform./.  Cell Biol. I 29:121—132,  1995.
143.  Vey  M.,  Pilkuhn  S.,  Wille  H.,  Nixon  R.,  DeArmond  S.J.,  Smart  E.J„ Anderson  R.G., 
Taraboulos A., and Prusiner S.B.: Subcellular colocalization of the cellular and scrapie prion   
proteins  in  caveolae-like   membranous   domains.   f'roc.  Natl.   Acad.   Sci.   USA 
93:14945—14949, 1996.
144.  Kaneko K,  Vey M., Scott M., Pilkuhn  S., Cohen F.E., and Prusiner S.B.: COOH-termi- nal 
sequence of the cellular prion protein directs subcellular  trafficking and controls conversion  
into the scrapie isoform. f'roc. Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  USA 94:2333—2338,  1997.
145.  Naslavsky N.,  Stein  R., Yanai A., Friedlander  G., and Taraboulos A.: Characterization of 
detergent-insoluble complexes containing  the cellular prion protein and its scrapie isoform. /. 
Biol.  Chem.  272:6324-6331, 1997.
146.  Gasset M., Baldwin  M.A., Lloyd D., Gabriel J.-M., Holtzman  D.M., Cohen F., Fletterick R., 
and  Prusiner  S.B.:  Predicted  n-helical  regions  of the  prion  protein  when  synthe- sized as 
peptides form amyloid.  Poor. Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  USA 89: 10940—10944,  1992.
l4T.  Huang  Z., Gabriel J.-M., Baldwin  M.A., Fletterick  R.J., Prusiner  S.B., and Cohen  F.E.: 
Proposed  three-dimensional structure  for the cellular prion  protein. Proc. Natl.  Acad. Sci.  
USA 91:7139—7l43,  1994.
148.  Zhang H., Kaneko K., NguyenJ.T., Livshits T.L., Baldwin M.A., Cohen F.E., James T.L.,

Stanley B.  Prusiner                                             119

and   Prusiner S.B.: Conformational transitions in  peptides containing  two putative a- helices of 
the  prion  protein. /.  Not. Biol. 250:514—526,  1995.
149.  Schatzl  H.M.,  Da  Costa  M.,  Taylor  L., Cohen  F.E.,  and   Prusiner  S.B.:  Prion  
protein gene variation  among primates. /.  Mol. Biol. 245:362—374,  1995.
150.  Bamborough P., Wille H., Telling G.C., Yehiely F., Prusiner S.B., and  Cohen F.E.: Prion 
protein  structure  and  scrapie  replication:  theoretical,  spectroscopic  and  genetic  in- 
vestigations.  Cold  Sfming Harb. Symp. Quant. Biol. 61:495—509, 1996.
151   Hay  B., Barry  R.A.,  Lieberburg  I., Prusiner S.B.,  and  Lingappa  V.R.:  Biogenesis  and 
transmembrane  orientation  of the  cellular isoform  of the  scrapie  prion  protein. Mol. Cell. 
Biol. 7:914—920, 1987.
152.  De  Fea K.A.,  Nakahara  D.H., Calayag  M.C.,  Yost C.S.,  Mirels  L.F.,  Prusiner S.B., and 
Lingappa V.R.: Determinants of carboxyl-terminal domain translocation during prion protein 
biogenesis. J.  Biol. Clumi. 269:16810—16820, 1994.
153   Hegde   R.S.,   Mastrianni  J.A.,  Scott   M.R.,   DeFea   KA.,  Tremblay   P.,  Torchia   
M., DeArmond  S.J.,  Prusiner  S.B.,  and   Lingappa  V.R.:  A  transmembrane  form  of  the prion  
protein in neurodegenerative disease.  Science 279: 827—834, 1998.
154.  Riek  R.,  Hornemann  S.,  Wider  G.,  Billeter  M.,  Glockshuber  R.,  and   Wiithrich  K: 
NMR   structure    of    the    mouse    prion    protein    domain    PrP(121—23I ) .    Nature 
382:180—182,  1996.
155. James T.L.,  Liu  H.,  Ulyanov  N.B.,  Farr-Jones  S.,  Zhang  H.,  Donne  D.G.,  Kaneko  K., 
Groth  D.,  Mehlhorn  I.,  Prusiner  S.B.,  and   Cohen  F.E.:  Solution  structure  of  a  142- 
residue  recombinant  prion  protein  corresponding  to the  infectious fragment of  the scrapie 
isoform.  Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94:10086-10091, 1997.
156.  Donne  D.G., Viles J.H., Groth  D., Mehlhorn  I., James T.L., Cohen F.E., Prusiner S.B., 
Wright  P.E., and  Dyson  H.J.: Structure  of the  recombinant full-length  hamster  prion protein  
PrP(29-231) :  the   N  terminus  is  highly  flexible.  Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  USA 
94:13452—13457, 1997.
157   Williamson  R.A.,  Peretz  D.,  Smorodinsky  N.,  Bastidas  R.,  Serban  H.,  Mehlhorn  I., 
DeArmond S.J., Prusiner S.B., and  Burton D.R.: Circumventing  tolerance  to generate autologous  
monoclonal  antibodies  to  the  prion  protein.  Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  USA 93:7279—7282, 
1996.
158.  Peretz   D.,   Williamson   R.A.,   Matsunaga   Y.,   Serban   H.,   Pinilla   C.,   Bastidas 
  R., Rozenshteyn  R., James T.L.,  Houghten  R.A.,  Cohen  F.E.,  Prusiner S.B.,  and   Burton 
D.R.: A conformational  transition  at  the  N terminus of  the prion  protein  features in 
formation of the scrapie isoform. J. Mol. Biol. 273:6l4—622,  1997.
159.  Haughey  B.,  Race  R.E.,  Ernst  D.,  Buchmeier  M.J.,  and   Chesebro  B.:  Prion  protein 
biosynthesis   in   scrapie-infected   and    uninfected    neuroblastoma    cells.         Virol. 
63:175—181,  1989.
160.  Shmerling  D.,  Hegyi  I.,  Fischer  M.,  Blattler  T.,  Brandner  S.,  Gtitz  J.,   Rulicke  
T.,
Flechsig  E., Cozzio A., von  Mering C., Hangartner  C., Aguzzi A., and  Weissmann  C.: Expression 
of amino-terminally truncated PrP in the mouse leading to ataxia and spe- cific cerebellar lesions. 
 Cell  93:20W214, 1998.
161   Mehlhorn  I.,  Groth  D.,  Stockel  J.,  Moffat  B.,  Reilly  D.,  Yansura  D.,  Willett  
W.S., Bald    n  M.,  Fletterick  R.,  Cohen  F.E.,  Vandlen  R.,  Henner  D.,  and   Prusiner  
S.B.: High-level  expression  and  characterization  of  a  purified  142-residue  polypeptide  of 
the prion protein. Biochemists   35:5528-5537,  1996.
162.  Zhang H., StfickelJ.,  Mehlhorn  I., Groth  D., Baldwin  M.A., Prusiner S.B., James T.L., and 
 Cohen F.E.: Physical studies of conformational plasticity  in a recombinant  prion protein.  
Biochemists   36:3543—3553, 1997.
163.  Fischer  M., Riilicke T., Raeber A., Sailer A., Moser M., Oesch  B., Brandner  S., Aguzzi A., 
and  Weissmann  C.: Prion  protein  (PrP)  with  amino-proximal deletions  restoring susceptibility 
of PrP knockout mice to scrapie. EMBO J. 15:1255—1264,  1996.
164.  Muramoto  T., DeArmond  S.J., Scott M., Telling G.C., Cohen  F.E., and   Prusiner S.B.: 
Heritable disorder resembling neuronal storage disease in mice expressing prion pro- tein with 
deletion of an  a-helix.  Nat. Med. 3:75O-755, 1997.

120                                         Physiology or  Medicine  1997

165   Riek R., Hornemann  S., Wider G., Glockshuber  R., and Wuthrich  K:  NMR characte- rization  
of the  fulMength  recombinant  murine  prion  protein,  inPrP(23—231) . FEBS Lett 413:282—288,  
1997.
166.  Huang  Z., Prusiner  S.B., and Cohen  F.E.: Scrapie  prions: a three-dimensional model of an 
infectious fragment. Folding N  Design 1: 13—19,  1996.
167.  Turk E., Teplow D.B., Hood L.E., and Prusiner S.B.: Purification  and properties of the 
cellular and scrapie  hamster prion  proteins. Eur. J.  Biochem.  l 76:21—30,  1988.
168.  Muramoto  T., Scott M., Cohen  F., and Prusiner  S.B.: Recombinant  scrapie-like  prion
protein of 106 amino acids is soluble.  Proc. Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  USA 93:15457—15462,  1996.
169.  Caughey B.W., Dong A., Bhat K.S., Ernst D., Hayes S.F., and Caughey W.S.: Secondary structure 
 analysis  of  the  scrapie-associated  protein  PrP  27—30  in  water  by  infrared spectroscopy.  
Biochemistry  30:7672—7680,  1991.
170.  Gasset M., Baldwin  M.A., Fletterick R.J., and Prusiner S.B.: Perturbation  of the sec‹in- 
dary structure  of the scrapie prion  protein  under conditions  associated with  changes in 
infectivity.  Proc. Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  USA 90:I—5,  1993.
171.   SafarJ., Roller P.P., Gajdusek D.C., and Gibbs C.J., Jr.: Conformational transitions, dis- 
sociation,   and   unfolding    of   scrapie   amyloid    (prion)    protein.   J.    Biol.    
Chem. 268:2027€r—20284, 1993.
172.  Rogers M., Yehiely F., Scott M., and Prusiner  S.B.: Conversion  of truncated and elon- gated 
 prion  proteins  into  the  scrapie  isoform  in  cultured  cells.  Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci. USA 
90:3182—3186,  1993.
173.  Barry R.A. and Prusiner S.B.: Monoclonal  antibodies to the cellular and scrapie prion 
proteins. /. Infect. Dis.  154:518—52l,  1986.
174.  Kascsak  R.J.,  Rubenstein   R.,  Merz   P.A.,   Tonna-DeMasi   M.,  Fersko   R.,  Carp  
R.I., Wisniewski  H.M.,  and  Diringer  H.:  Mouse  polyclonal  and  monoclonal  antibody  to 
scrapie-associated fibril proteins.     Virof. 61:3688—3693,  1987.
Rogers M., Serban D., Gyuris T., Scott M., Torchia T., and Prusiner S.B.: Epitope map- ping of the 
Syrian  hamster prion protein utilizing chimeric and mutant genes in a vac- cinia virus expression  
system.     Immunol.  147:3568—3574, 1991.
176.  Korth  C.,  Stierli  B.,  Streit  P., Moser  M.,  Schaller  O., Fischer  R.,  
Schulz-Schaeffer W., Kretzschmar  H., Raeber A., Braun  U., Ehrensperger  F., Horneman n S., 
Glockshuber R., Riek R., Billeter M., Wuthrich K., and Oesch B.: Prion  (PrP")-specific epitope de- 
fined by a monoclonal  antibody. Nature 389:74—77,  1997.
177.  Billeter  M.,  Riek  R.,  Wider  G.,  Horneman n  S.,  Glockshuber  R.,  and  Wuthrich  K.: 
Prion  protein  NMR structure  and species  barrier for prion  diseases.  Proc.  Natl.  Acad. Sci.  
USA 94:7281-7285,  1997.
178.  Kaneko K,  Zulianello L., Scott M., Cooper C.M., Wallace A.C., James T.L., Cohen  F.E., and 
Prusiner S.B.: Evidence  for protein  X binding  to a discontinuous  epitope on  the cellular  
prion  protein  during  scrapie  prion  propagation.  Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  USA 94: 
I0069—I0074,  1997.
179.  Telling  G.C.,  Scott  M.,  Hsiao  KK.,  Foster  D.,  Yang  S.-L.,  Torchia  M.,  Sidle  
K.C.L., Collinge J.,  DeArmond  S.J., and Prusiner S.B.: Transmission  of Creutzfeldt-Jakob dis- 
ease from  humans  to  transgenic  mice expressing  chimeric  h uman-mouse  prion  pro- tein. Proc. 
 Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  USA 91:993€r—9940,  1994.
180.  Stockel J.,  Safar J.,  Wallace  A.C.,  Cohen  F.E.,  and  Prusiner  S.B.:  Prion  protein  
selec- tively binds copper-II-ions. Biochemists    37: 7185—7193,  1998.
181.  Hornshaw  M.P., McDermott J.R., Candy J. M., and Lakey J.H.: Copper binding  to the 
N-terminal  tandem  repeat region  of mammalian  and avian  prion  protein:  structural studies 
using synthetic  peptides. Biochem.  Biophys.  Res.  Commun.  214:993—999,  1995.
182.  Hornshaw M.P.,  McDermott J.R., and Candy J.M.: Copper  binding  to the N-terminal tandem  
repeat regions of mammalian  and avian  prion  protein.  Biochem.  Biophys.  Res. Commun.  
207:621—629,  1995.
183   Miura T., Hori-i A.,  and Takeuchi  H.: Metal-dependent ct-helix  formation  promoted by the 
glycine-rich  octapeptide  region of prion  protein. FEBS Lett.  396:248-252,  1996.
184.  Brown  D.R.,  Schulz-Schaeffer W.J., Schmidt B., and Kretzschmar  H.A.: Prion  protein-

Stanley B. Prusttter                                               121

deficient cells show altered response  to oxidative stress due to decreased  SOD-I  activ- ity. 
Exp. Neurol.  146: 104-112,  1997.
185.  Harris E.D.: Copper as a cofactor and regulator of copper, zinc superoxide dismutase.
].  Nutr.  122:63f›—640,  1992.
186.  Brown  D.R., Q_in K,   HermsJ.W., Madlung A., Manson J.,  Strome R., Fraser P.E., Kruck T.,  
von  Bohlen  A.,  Schulz-Schaeffer W.,  Giese A.,  Westaway  D.,  and  Kretzschmar  H.: The 
cellular prion protein  binds copper  in eivo. Nature 390:684—687,  1997.
187   Vulpe C., Levinson  B., Whitney S., Packman  S., and Gitschier J.:  Isolation  of a candi- 
date  gene  for  Menkes  disease  and  evidence  that  it  encodes  a  copper-transporting ATPase.  
Nat.  Genet.  3:7—13,  1993.
188.  Chelly J.,   Turner  Z.,  T‹annesen  T.,  Petterson  A.,  Ishikawa-Brush  Y.,  Tommerup  N., 
Horn N., and Monaco A.P.: Isolation  of a candidate gene for Menkes disease  that en- codes a 
potential  heavy metal binding protein.  Nat.  Genet.  3:14—19,  1993.
189.  Bull P.C., Thomas G.R., RommensJ.M.,  ForbesJ.R., and Cox D.W.: The Wilson disease gene is a 
puta tive copper transporting  P-type ATPase similar to the Menkes gene. Nat. Cenet.  5:327—337,  
1993.
190.  Petrukhin  K., Fischer S.G., Pirastu M., Tanzi R.E., Chernov I., Devoto M., Brzustowicz L.M., 
Cayanis  E., Vitale E., Russo J.J., Matseoane  D., Boukhgalter  B., Wasco W., Figus A.L., Loudianos 
J.,  Cao A., Sternlieb I., Evgrafov O., Parano E., Pavone L., Warburton D.,  Ott J.,  Penchaszadeh  
G.K,  Scheinberg  LH.,  and  Gilliam  T.C.:  Mapping,  cloning and genetic  characterization  of 
the  region  containing  the Wilson  disease  gene.  Nat. Cenet.  5:338—343,  1993.
191.  Pattison I.H. and JebbettJ.N.: Clinical and histological observations on cuprizone  tox- 
icity and scrapie in mice. Res. Vet.  Sci.  12:378—380,  1971.
192.  Kimberlin  R.H.,  Millson  G.C.,  Bountiff L., and Collis  S.C.: A comparison  of the  bio- 
chemical changes induced in mouse  brain  by cuprizone  toxicity and by scrapie infec- tion. J.  
Comp. Path.  84:263—270,  1974.
193.  Gabriel J.-M.,  Oesch  B., Kretzschmar  H.,  Scott  M.,  and  Prusiner  S.B.:  Molecular  
clo- ning  of  a candidate  chicken  prion  protein.  Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  S‹:i.  USA  
89:9097—9101, 1992.
194.  Westaway D., Goodman  P.A., Mirenda C.A., McKinley M.P., Carlson  G.A., and Prusiner
S.B.:  Distinct  prion  proteins  in  short  and  long  scrapie  incubation  period  mice.  Cell
5l:651—662,  198'7.
195   Westaway D., Mirenda C.A., Foster D., Zebarjadian Y., Scott M., Torchia M., Yang S.-L., 
Serban  H., DeArmond  S.J., Ebeling  C., Prusiner  S.B.,  and Carlson  G.A.:  Paradoxical 
shortening of scrapie incubation  times by expression  of prion  protein  transgenes de- rived from 
long incubation  period mice. Neuron 7:59—68,  1991.
196.  Yoshimoto J.,  linuma  T.,  Ishiguro  N., Horiuchi  M., Imainura  M.,  and Shinagawa  M.: 
Comparative  sequence  analysis  and  expression  of bovine  PrP  gene  in  mouse  L-929 cells.  
firms Genes 6:343—356,  1992.
197.  Westaway  D.,  Cooper  C.,  Turner  S.,  Da  Costa  M.,  Carlson  G.A.,  and  Prusiner  S.B.: 
Structure  and polymorphism  of the  mouse  prion  protein  gene.  f'roc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci. USA 
91:6418—6422,  1994.
198.  Westaway  D., Zuliani V., Cooper C.M.,  Da Costa M., Neuman  S., Jenny A.L., Detwiler L., and 
Prusiner S.B.: Homozygosity for prion protein alleles encoding glutamine-171 renders sheep 
susceptible  to natural scrapie.  Genes Den. 8:959—969,  1994.
199.  Saeki  K,  Matsumoto  Y, Hirota Y, Matsumoto  Y., and Onodera  T.: Three-exon  struc-
ture  of the  gene  encoding  the  rat  prion  protein  and  its  expression  in  tissues.  Virus 
Cenes  12:15—20,  1996.
200.  Li G. and Bolton D.C.: A novel hamster prion  protein  mRNA contains an extra exon: increased 
expression  in scrapie.  Brain Res. 751:265—274,  1997.
201.  Lee I., Westaway D., Smit A., Wang R,  Cooper C., Yao H., Prusiner S.B., and Hood L.: in 
preparation.
202.  McKnight  S.  and  Tjian  R.:  Transcriptional  selectivity  of viral  genes  in  mammalian 
cells. Cell 46:795—805,  1986.

122

203.



204.
Physiology or Medicine  1997

Robakis   N.K,   Devine-Gage   E.A.,   Kascsak   R.J.,   Brown   W.T.,   Krawczun   C.,   and 
Silverman  W.P.: Localization  of a human gene homologous  to the PrP gene on  the p arm of 
chromosome 20 and detection of PrP-related antigens in normal human brain. Biochem.  Biophys.  Res. 
 Commun.  140:758—765,  1986.
Sparkes R.S., Simon M., Cohn V.H., Fournier R.E.K., Lem J.,  Klisak I., Heinemann  C., Blatt  C.,  
Lucero  M.,  Mohandas  T.,  DeArmond  S.J.,  Westaway  D.,  Prusiner  S.B.,  and Weiner  L.P.:  
Assignment  of the  human  and  mouse  prion  protein  genes  to  homolo- gous chromosomes.  Proc. 
Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  USA 83:7358—7362,  1986.
205. Mobley  W.C.,  Neve  R.L.,  Prusiner  S.B.,  and  McKinley  M.P.:  Nerve  growth  factor  in- 
creases mRNA levels for the prion  protein  and  the beta-amyloid  protein  precursor in developing 
 hamster brain. Proc. Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  USA 85:9811—9815,  1988.
206.  Kretzschmar  H.A.,  Prusiner  S.B.,  Stowring  L.E.,  and  DeArmond  S.J.:  Scrapie  prion 
proteins are synthesized in neurons.  Am. ].  Pathol.  122: 1—5,  1986.
207.  DeArmond  S.J., Mobley W.C., DeMott D.L., Barry R.A., Beckstead J.H., and  Prusiner S.B.:  
Changes  in  the  localization  of  brain  prion  proteins  during  scrapie  infection. Neurology  
37:1271—1280,  1987.
208.  Taraboulos A., Jendroska K., Serban D., Yang S.-L., DeArmond S.J., and Prusiner S.B.: 
Regional mapping of prion  proteins in brains. Proc. Natl.  Acad.  Sci. USA 89:7620—7624, 1992.
209. Kimberlin  R.H., Field H.J., and Walker C.A.: Pathogenesis of mouse scrapie: evidence for  
spread  of  infection   from  central   to  peripheral  nervous  system.  /.   Grp.   ¥“irol. 
64:713—7l6,  1983.
210. Fraser H. and Dickinson A.G.: Targeting of scrapie lesions and spread of agent via the 
retino-tectal  projection.  Brain Res. 346:32—41,  1985.
211. Jendroska K,  Heinzel F.P., Torchia M., Stowring  L., Kretzschmar  H.A., Kon A.,  Stern A., 
Prusiner S.B., and DeArmond  S.J.: Proteinase-resistant prion protein  accumulation in  Syrian  
hamster  brain  correlates  with  regional  pathology  and  scrapie  infectivity. Neurology  41: 
1482—1490,  1991.
212.  Carlson  G.A., Kingsbury  D.T.,  Goodman  P.A., Coleman  S., Marshall  S.T.,  DeArmond
S.J., Westaway D., and Prusiner S.B.: Linkage of prion  protein  and scrapie incubation time genes. 
 Cell 46:503—5ll , 1986.
213. Scott M.,  Foster D., Mirenda  C., Serban  D., Coufal F., Walchli  M., Torchia  M.,  Groth D., 
Carlson  G., DeArmond  S.J., Westaway  D., and Prusiner  S.B.: Transgenic  mice  ex- pressing  
hamster  prion  protein  produce  species-specific scrapie  infecuvity  and amy- loid plaques.  
Cell 59:847—857,  1989.
214.  Dickinson A.G., Meikle V.M.H., and Fraser H.: Identification of a gene which controls the  
incubation   period  of  some  strains  of  scrapie  agent  in  mice.  J.   Comp.   Pathol. 
78:293—299,  1968.
2\5.  Kingsbury  D.T., Kasper KC.,  Stites D.P., Watson J.D., Hogan  R.N., and Prusiner  S.B.: 
Genetic   control   of  scrapie   and   Creutzfeldt-Jakob   disease   in   mice.  J.   Immunol. 
131:491—496,  1983.
216.  Carlson G.A., Goodman P.A., Lovett M., Taylor B.A., Marshall S.T., Peterson-Torchia M., 
Westaway  D., and Prusiner  S.B.: Genetics and polymorphism  of the  mouse prion  gene complex: the 
control of scrapie incubation  time. Mol.  Cell.  Biol. 8:5528—5540,  1988.
217. Carlson  G.A.,  Ebeling  C., Yang  S.-L.,  Telling  G., Torchia  M.,  Groth  D., Westaway  D., 
DeArmond  S.J.,  and  Prusiner  S.B.:  Prion  isolate  specified  allotypic  interactions  be- 
tween  the cellular and scrapie  prion  proteins  in  congenic  and transgenic  mice. Proc. Natl.  
Acad.  Sci.  USA 91:5690—5694,  1994.
218. Moore R.C., Hope J.,  McBride P.A., McConnell I., Selfridge J.,  and Melton  D.W.: Mice with 
gene  targeted  prion  protein  alterations  show  that  Pm-p,  Sink and Pm-i are  con- gruent. 
Nat.  Cenet.  18: 118—125,  1998.
219 Prusiner S.B., Scott M., Foster D., Pan K.-M., Groth  D., Mirenda C., Torchia M., Yang S.-L.,   
Serban   D.,   Carlson   G.A.,   Hoppe   P.C.,   Westaway   D.,   and   DeArmond   S.J.: 
Transgenetic studies implicate interactions between homologous PrP isoforms in scra- pie prion  
replication.  Cr/f 63:673-686,  1990.

Stand  B.  Prusiner                                                   123

220.  Bueler  H., Fischer  M., Lang Y, Bluethmann  H., Lipp H.-P., DeArmond  S.J., Prusiner S.B., 
Aguet M., and  Weissmann  C.: Normal development and  behaviour of mice lack- ing the  neuronal 
cell-surface  PrP protein.  Nature 356:577—582,  1992.
Manson  J.C.,  Clarke  A.R.,  Hooper  M.L.,  Aitchison  L.,  McConnell  I.,  and  Hope J.: 129/Ola  
mice  carrying a null  mutation  in  PrP  that abolishes  mRNA production  are developmentally 
normal.  Mol. Heurobiol. 8:12l—127, 1994.
222.  Sakaguchi  S.,  Katamine  S.,  Nishida  N.,  Moriuchi  R.,  Shigematsu  K,  Sugimoto  T., 
Nakatani A., Kataoka Y, Houtani T., Shirabe S., Okada H., Hasegawa S., Miyamoto T., and   Noda  T.: 
 Loss  of  cerebellar  Purkinje  cells  in  aged  mice  homozygous  for  a  dis- rupted PrP gene. 
Nature 380:528—53l, 1996.
223.  Tobler  I.,  Gaus  S.E.,  Deboer  T.,  Achermann  P.,  Fischer  M.,  Rulicke  T.,  Moser  M., 
Oesch B., McBride P.A., and  Manson J.C.: Altered circadian activity rhythms and  sleep in mice 
devoid of prion  protein.  Nature 380:639—642,  1996.
224.  Collinge J.,  Whittington  M.A.,  Sidle  KC., Smith  C.J.,  Palmer  M.S.,  Clarke  A.R.,  and 
Jeffer ys  J.G.R.:   Prion   protein   is   necessary   for   normal  synaptic   function.   Nature 
3'7O:295—297,  1994.
225.  Whittington  M.A.,  Sidle K.C.L.,  lowland  I., Meads J.,  Hill A.F., Palmer  M.S., Jefferys
J.G.R., and  Collinge J   Rescue of neurophysiological phenotype seen in PrP null mice by transgene 
encoding human  prion  protein. Ref.  Ww/. 9:197-20d , 1995.
226.  Herms  J.W.,  Kretzschmar   H.A.,  Titz  S.,  and   Keller  B.U.:  Patch-clamp  analysis  of 
synaptic  transmission  to cerebellar purkinje cells of prion protein knockout mice. Eur.
]. Neurosci. 7:2508—2512, 1995.
227.  Lledo  P.-M.,  Tremblay  P.,  DeArmond  S.J.,  Prusiner  S.B.,  and   Nicoll  R.A.:  Mice  
defi- cient for prion protein exhibit normal neuronal excitability and  synaptic transmission in  
the hippocampus.  Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93:2403—2407,  1996.
228.  Pattison I.H. and Jones KM.: Modification  of a strain of mouse-adapted scrapie by pas- sage 
through  rats. As.  Vet. Sci. 9:408—410,  1968.
229.  Kimberlin  R.H., Walker C.A., and  Fraser H.: The  genomic identity of different strains of 
mouse scrapie is expressed in hamsters and  preserved on  reisolation in mice. J.  M. Virol. 
70:2017—2025,  1989.
230.  Hecker  R., Taraboulos A., Scott M., Pan  K-M., Torchia M., Jendroska  K,  DeArmond S.J., and 
Prusiner S.B.: Replication  of distinct prion isolates is region specific in brains of transgenic  
mice and  hamsters.  Genes De-u. 6:1213-1228, 1992.
231.  Hunter  N.,  Goldmann  W.,  Benson  G.,  Foster J.D.,  and  Hope J.: Swaledale  sheep af- 
fected by natural scrapie differ significantly in PrP genotype frequencies from healthy sheep and 
those selected for reduced incidence of scrapie.     Gen.  Strol. 74:I025—1031, 1993.
232.  Shibuya S., Higuchi J., Shin  R.-W., Tateishi J.,  and  Kitamoto T.: Protective  prion  pro- 
tein  polymorphisms  against sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.  Lancet 351:419, 1998.
233.  TatzeltJ., Zuo J., Voellmy R., Scott M., Hartl U., Prusiner S.B., and  Welch W.J.: Scrapie
prions selectively  modify  the stress response  in  neuroblastoma  cells.  Proc. Natl. Acad. Sei. 
USA 92:2944—2948,  1995.
234.  Tatzelt J.,  Prusiner S.B., and  Welch W.J.: Chemical  chaperones  interfere with  the  for- 
mation of scrapie prion protein. EMBO J. 15:6363—6373,  1996.
235.  Kenward  N.,  Hope J.,  Landon  M.,  and   Mayer  R.J.:  Expression  of  polyubiquitin  and 
heat-shock  protein 70 genes increases in the later stages of disease progression  in scra- 
pie-infected  mouse brain.     Neurocfiein. 62:1870—1877,  1994.
236.  Oesch   B.,   Teplow   D.B.,   Stahl   N.,   Serban   D.,   Hood   L.E.,   and    Prusiner   
S.B.: Identification  of  cellular  proteins  binding  to  the  scrapie  prion  protein.  
Biochemistry 29:584&-5855, 1990.
237.  Kurschner C. and Morgan J.I.: Analysis of interaction  sites in  homo- and heteromeric
complexes containing Bcl-2 family members and the cellular prion protein. Mol. Brain Res.  
37:249—258,  1996.

124                                     Physiology or Medicine  199?

238.  Edenhofer  F.,  Rieger  R.,  Famulok  M.,  Wendler  W.,  Weiss  S.,  and  Winnacker  E.-L.: 
Prion  protein  PrP* interacts with  molecular chaperones  of the Hsp60 family. J.  Virol. 
70:4724—4728,  1996.
239.  Gerstmann J.,  Straussler E., and Scheinker I.: Uber eine eigenartige  hereditar-familia- re 
Erkrankung  des Zentralnervensystems zugleich  ein  Beitrag  zur frage  des vorzeiti- gen lokalen 
Alterns.  Z. Neurol.  154:73fi—762,  1936.
240.  Masters C.L., Harris J.O., Gajdusek D.C., Gibbs C.J., Jr., Bernouilli C., and Asher D.M.: 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease:  patterns of worldwide  occurrence  and  the  significance  of familal 
and sporadic clustering.  Ann. Neurol.  5: 177—188,  1978.
241.  Gajdusek  D.C.:  Unconventional viruses  and  the  origin  and  disappearance  of kuru.
Science  197:94M960,  1977.
242.  Bobowick  A.R.,  Brody J.A.,  Matthews  M.R.,  Roos R., and  Gajdusek  D.C.: Creutzfeldt- 
Jakob disease:  a case-control  study.  Am.]. Epidemiol.  98:381—394,  1973.
243.  Rosenthal  N.P., Keesey J.,  Crandall  B., and Brown  W.J.: Familial  neurological  disease 
associated with spongiform  encephalopathy. Arch. Neurol.  33:252—259,  1976.
244.  Doh-ura K., Tateishi J.,  Sasaki H., Kitamoto T., and Sakaki Y: Pro->Leu  change at po- 
sition  102 of prion  protein  is the most common  but not the sole  mutation  related  to 
Gerstmann-Straussler syndrome.  Biochem.  Biaphys.  Res.  Commun.  163:974—979,  1989.
245.   Goldgaber D., Goldfarb  L.G., Brown  P., Asher D.M., Brown  W.T., Lin  S., Teener J.W., 
Feinstone   S.M.,  Rubenstein   R.,  Kascsak  R.J     Boellaard  J.W.,  and  Gajdusek   D.C.: 
Mutations in familial Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and Gerstmann-Straussler-Scheinker's syndrome. Exp. 
Neurol.  106:204—206,  1989.
246.  Kretzschmar H.A., Honold G., Seitelberger F., Feucht M., Wessely P., Mehraein  P., and Budka  
H.: Prion  protein  mutation  in  family  first reported  by Gerstmann,  Straussler, and Scheinker. 
 Lancet  337: 1160,  1991.
247.  Hsiao  KK,    Scott  M.,  Foster  D.,  Groth   D.F.,  DeArmond   S.J.,  and  Prusiner   S.B.: 
Spontaneous   neurodegeneration  in   transgenic   mice  with   mutant   prion   protein. Science 
250: 1587—1590,  1990.
248.  Hsiao KK,   Groth  D., Scott M., Yang S.-L., Serban  H., Rapp D., Foster D., Torchia  M., 
DeArmond  S.J., and Prusiner  S.B.:  Serial  transmission  in  rodents of neurodegenera- tion from  
transgenic  mice expressing  mutant prion  protein. Proc. Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  USA 91:912d—9130,  
1994.
249.  Telling  G.C.,  Haga  T.,  Torchia  M.,  Tremblay  P.,  DeArmond  S.J.,  and  Prusiner  S.B.: 
Interactions  between  wild-type  and mutant prion  proteins modulate  neurodegenera- tion in 
transgenic  mice.  Genes U   Dec.  10: l73h—1750,  1996.
250.   Scott M.R., Nguyen O., Stockel J.,  TatzeltJ., DeArmond  S.J., Cohen F.E., and Prusiner 
S.B.: Designer mutations in the prion  protein  promote  Q-sheet formation  tn -uitro and cause  
neurodegeneration  in  transgenic  mice  (Abstr.) .  f'rotñti  Sci.  6  [Suppl.   1]:84, 1997.
251.  Alpers M.P.: Kuru: implications of its transmissibility for interpretation of in changing 
epidemiological   pattern.   The   Central   Ner-uous   System,    Some  Experimental   Models   of 
Neurological Diseases. Bailey O.T. and Smith D.E., Eds. Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore, l968pp. 
234-251.
252.  Alpers M.:  Epidemiology  and clinical aspects of kuru. Prions—Nouel  Infectious  Pathogens
Causing  Scrapie  and  Creutzfeldt-Jakob  Disease.  Prusiner  S.B.  and  McKinley  M.P.,  Eds. 
Academic Press, Orlando,  1987 pp. 451—465.
253   Brown  P., Preece  M.A.,  and Will R.G.:  “Friendly  fire” in medicine:  hormones,  homo- 
grafts, and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. Lancet  340:24-27,  1992.
254   Billette de Villemeur T., Deslys J.-P., Pradel A., Soubrié C., Alpérovitch A., Tardieu M., 
Chaussain J.-L., HauwJ  -J., Dormont D., Ruberg M., and Agid Y: Creutzfeldt-Jakob dis- ease  from  
contaminated  growth  hormone  extracts  in  France.  Neurology  47:690-695, 1996.
255. Prusiner S. B., Scott M. R., Dearmond S. J.,  and  Cohen F. E. Prion protein biology. Cell
93:337—348,  1998.
256.  Esmonde T., Lueck C.J., Symon L., Duchen L.W., and  Will R.G.: Creutzfeldt-Jakob dis-

Stanley B.  Prusiner                                                125

ease  and  lyophilised  dura  mater  grafts:  report  of  two  cases.   ;f.  Neurol.   Neurosurg. 
Psychiatry  56:999—1000,  1993.
Lane   K.L.,   Brown   P.,   Howell   D.N.,   Crain   B.J.,   Hulette   C.M.,   Burger   P.C.,   
and DeArmond  SJ.: Creutzfeldt-jakob disease in a pregnant woman with an implanted du- ra mater 
graft. Neurosurgery  34:737—740,  1994.
258.  CDC:  Creutzfeldt-Jakob  disease  associated  with  cadaveric  dura  mater  grafts—Japan, 
January  1979—May  1996. MMWR 46: l06€›-1069,  1997.
259.  Kimberlin  R.H.:  Reflections  on  the  nature  of the  scrapie  agent.  Trends  Biochem.  
Sci.
7:392—394,  1982.
260.  Dickinson A.G. and Outram G.W.: Genetic aspects of unconventional virus infections: the  
basis of  the virino hypothesis.  Novel Infectious  Agents and the Central Nervous  System. Ciba  
Foundation  Symposium  135.  Bock  G.  and  Marsh  J.,   Eds. John  Wiley  and  Sons, Chichester,  
UK, 1988 pp. 63-83.
261.  Bruce M.E., McConnell  I., Fraser H., and Dickinson  A.G.: The disease  characteristics of 
different strains of scrapie in  Sinc congenic mouse lines: implications for the nature of the 
agent and host control of pathogenesis.  ;f.  Gen.  Vzrof. 72:595—603,  1991.
262.  Weissmann  C.: A “unified  theory” of prion  propagation.  Nature 352:679—683,  1991.
263.  Ridley  R.M.  and Baker  H.F.:  To what  extent  is strain  variation  evidence  for an  
inde- pendent  genome  in  the  agent  of  the  transmissible  spongiform  encephalopathies? 
Neurodegeneration 5:219—231,  1996.
264.  Fraser H. and Dickinson  A.G.: Scrapie  in mice. Agent-strain  differences  in  the distri- 
bution and intensity of grey matter vacuolation. /.  Come. Pathol.  83:29-40,  1973.
265   Bruce M.E., McBride P.A., and Farquhar C.F.: Precise  targeting of the pathology of the 
sialoglycoprotein,  PrP,  and  vacuolar  degeneration   in  mouse  scrapie.  Neurosci.  Lett. 102: 
1—6,  1989.
266.  DeArmond  S.J., Yang  S.-L., Lee A., Bowler R., Taraboulos A.,  Groth  D., and Prusiner S.B.: 
Three scrapie prion isolates exhibit different accumulation  patterns of the prion protein  scrapie 
isoform. Proc. Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  USA 90:6449—6453,  1993.
267.  Dickinson  A.G. and Meikle V.M.: A comparison  of some  biological  characteristics of the 
mouse-passaged scrapie agents, 22A and ME7.  Cenet.  As. 13:213—225,  1969.
268.  Bruce M.E. and Dickinson A.G.: Biological evidence  that the scrapie agent has an in- 
dependent genome. J.  Cen.  Virol. 68:79—89,  1987.
269.  Hunter N., Hope J.,  McConnell  I., and Dickinson A.G.: Linkage  of the scrapie-associ- ated 
fibril protein  (PrP) gene and Sinc using congenic mice and restriction  fragment length  
polymorphism  analysis. /.  Grp.  Virof. 68:271l—2716,  1987.
270.  Bessen  R.A. and Marsh  R.F.: Identification of two biologically distinct strains of  trans- 
missible mink encephalopathy in hamsters. /.   •rr.  Virol. 73:329—334,  1992.
271.  Bessen  R.A., Kocisko D.A., Raymond  G.J., Nandan  S., Lansbury P.T., and Caughey B.: 
Non-genetic  propagation of strain-specific properties of scrapie prion  protein. Nature 
375:698-700,  1995.
272.  Monari L., Chen  S.G., Brown  P., Parchi P., Petersen R.B., Mikol J.,  Gray F., Cortelli  P., 
Montagna  P.,  Ghetti  B., Goldfarb  L.G.,  Gajdusek  D.C., Lugaresi  E.,  Gambetti  P., and 
Autilio-Gambetti L.: Fatal familial insomnia and familial Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease: dif- ferent 
prion  proteins determined  by a DNA polymorphism.  Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  USA 91:2839—2842,  
1994.
273   Parchi  P.,  Castellani  R.,  Capellari  S.,  Ghetti  B.,  Young  K.,  Chen  S.G.,  Farlow  
M., Dickson   D.W.,   Sima   A.A.F.,   Trojanowski   J.@.,   Petersen   R.B.,   and   Gambetti   
P.: Molecular  basis  of phenotypic  variability  in  sporadic  Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.  Ann. 
Neurol.  39:767—778,  1996.
274   Mastrianni J.,  Nixon F., Layzer R., DeArmond  S.J., and Prusiner S.B.: Fatal sporadic in- 
somnia:  fatal  familial  insomnia  phenotype  without  a  mutation  of the  prion  protein gene. 
Neurology  48 [Suppl.] :A296,  1997.
275.  Fraser  H.  and  Dickinson  A.G.:  The  sequential  development  of the  brain  lesions  of 
scrapie in  three strains of mice.  ;f.  Comp. Pathol.  78:301—311,  1968.

126                                   Physiology or Medicine  1997

276.  Carp R.I., Meeker H., and Sersen E.: Scrapie strains  retain  their distinctive  character- 
istics following  passages  of  homogenates  from  different  brain  regions  and spleen. J. ten. 
Virol. 78:283—290,  1997.
277.  DeArmond   S.J     Sa'fl   hez  H.,   Yehiely   F.,   Qiu   Y,   Ninchak-Casey   A.,   
Daggett   V., Camerino A.P., CayetanoJ.,  Rogers M., Groth D., Torchia M., Tremblay P., Scott M.R., 
Cohen  F.E., and  Prusiner  S.B.:  Selective  neuronal  targeting  in prion  disease.  Neuron
19:1337—l348,  1997.
278.  Medori R., Tritschler H.-J., LeBlanc A., Villare F., Manetto V., Chen H.Y., Xue R., Leal S., 
Montagna P., Cortelli P., Tinuper P., Avoni  P., Mochi M., Baruzzi A., HauwJ.J.,  Ott J.,  Lugaresi 
 E., Autilio-Gambetti L., and Gambetti  P.: Fatal familial  insomnia,  a prion disease  with  a  
mutation  at  codon  178  of  the  prion  protein  gene.  N.  Engl.  ].   Med. 326:44       49, 
1992.
279.  Anderson  R.M., Donnelly C.A., Ferguson N.M., Woolhouse M.E.J., Watt C.J., Udy H.J., 
MaWhinney   S.,   Dunstan   S.P.,   Southwood   T.R.E.,   Wilesmith   J.W.,   Ryan   J.B.M., 
Hoinville  L.J.,  Hillerton J.E., Austin  A.R.,  and Wells  G.A.H.:  Transmission  dynamics and 
epidemiology of BSE in British  cattle. Nature 382:779—788,  1996.
280.  Nathanson N., Wilesmith J  , and Griot C.: Bovine spongiform  encephalopathy (BSE) : cause 
and consequences of a common source epidemic.  Am. J. Epidemiol.  145:959—969, 1997.
281.  Stekel  D.J.,  Nowak  M.A.,  and  Southwood  T.R.E.:  Prediction  of  future  BSE  spread.
Nature 381: 119,  1996.
282.  Wilesmith  J.W.,  Ryan  J.B.M.,  and  Atkinson  M.J    Bovine  spongiform  encephalopat- 
hy—Epidemiologic studies on  the origin. Vet. &c. 128:199—203,  1991.
283.  Wilesmith J.W.: The epidemiology of bovine spongiform  encephalopathy. Semin.  Virol.
2:239—245,  1991.
284.  Kimberlin  R.H.:  Speculations  on  the  origin  of  BSE  and  the  epidemiology  of  CJD. 
Bourne  Spongiform Encephalopathy:  The BSE Dilemma.  Gibbs  C.J., Jr.,  Ed.  Springer,  New York,  
1996 pp.  155—175.
285.  Goldmann  W., Hunter N., Manson J.,  and Hope J.:  The PrP gene of the sheep,  a na-
tural host of scrapie. Proceedings  of the Mlllh International Congress of Virology,  Bwlin,  Aug.
26—JJ 284, 1990.
286.  Goldmann  W., Hunter N., Martin T., Dawson  M., and Hope J.:  Different forms of the bovine 
PrP gene have five or six copies of a short, G-G-rich element within  the protein- coding exon. /.  
Gen. Virol. 72:201—204,  1991.
287.  Prusiner  S.B.,  Fuzi  M.,  Scott M.,  Serban  D.,  Serban  H., Taraboulos A.,  Gabriel 
J.-M., Wells G., Wilesmith J.,  Bradley R., DeArmond  S.J., and Kristensson  K:  Immunologic and 
molecular  biological  studies of prion  proteins  in  bovine spongiform  encephalo- pathy. /. 
Infect. Dis.  167:602—613,  1993.
288.  Hunter N., Goldmann W., Smith G., and Hope J.:  Frequencies of PrP gene variants in healthy 
cattle and cattle with BSE in Scotland.  Vet. Rec.  135:400-403,  1994.
289.  Fraser H., McConnell I., Wells G.A.H., and Dawson M.: Transmission  of bovine spongi- form 
encephalopathy to mice. Vet. &c. 123:472,  1988.
290   Dawson  M., Wells G.A.H.,  and Parker B.N.J.: Preliminary evidence of the experimen- tal    
transmissibility   of   bovine   spongiform    encephalopathy   to   cattle.    Vet.    Rec. 
126:112—t13,  1990.
291.  Dawson  M., Wells G.A.H., Parker B.N.J., and Scott A.C.: Primary parenteral  transmit
sion of bovine spongiform  encephalopathy to the pig. Vet. Rec.  127:338,  1990.
292.  Bruce M., Chree A., McConnell I., FosterJ., and Fraser H.: Transmissions of BSE, scra- pie 
and related diseases to mice  (Abstr.) . Proceedings  of the IXth International  Congress  of 
Virology 93, 1993.
293.  Bruce   M.E.,   Will   R.G.,   Ironside  J.W.,   McConnell   I.,   Drummond   D.,   Suttie   
A., McCardle  L., Chree A., Hope J.,  Birkett  C.,  Cousens  S., Fraser  H., and  Bostock  C.J.: 
Transmissions  to  mice  indicate  that  'new  variant'  CJD  is  caused  by  the  BSE  agent. 
Nature 389:498—50l,  1997.
294.  Robinson  M.M.,  Hadlow  W.J.,  Knowles  D.P.,  Huff  T.P.,  Lacy  P.A.,  Marsh  R.F.,  and

Stand  B.  Prusiner                                             12’7

Gorham J.R.: Experimental  infection  of cattle  with  the  agents of transmissible  mink 
encephalopathy and scrapie. /.  Come. Path.  113:241-251,  1995.
295   Hope J.,  Reekie L.J.D., Hunter N., Multhaup  G., Beyreuther  K., White H., Scott A.C., Stack 
M.J.,  Dawson  M., and Wells G.A.H.:  Fibrils from  brains of  cows with  new cattle disease  
contain  scrapie-associated protein. Nature 336:390—392,  1988.
296.  Serban  D.,  Taraboulos  A.,  DeArmond   S.J.,  and  Prusiner  S.B.:  Rapid  detection  of
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and scrapie prion  proteins. Nnirologf  40: 110—117,  1990.
297.  Grathwohl  K.-U.D.,  Horiuchi  M.,  Ishiguro  N.,  and  Shinagawa  M.:  Sensitive  enzyme- 
linked immunosorbent assay for detection  of PrPSc in crude  tissue extracts from scra- 
pie-affected  mice.  ;f.  Virol.  Methods 64:205—216,  1997.
298.  Scott  M.R.,   Safar  J.,   Telling   G.,  Nguyen   O.,  Groth   D.,  Torchia  M.,  Koehler  
R., Tremblay P., Walther D., Cohen F.E., DeArmond  S.J., and Prusiner S.B.: Identification of a 
prion  protein  epitope  modulating  transmission  of bovine  spongiform  encepha- lopathy prions 
to transgenic mice. Proc. Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  USA 94:14279—l4284,  1997.
299.  Taylor KC.: The control  of bovine spongiform  encephalopathy in  Great Britain.  Vet.
c. 129:522—526,  1991.
300.  Fraser H., Bruce M.E., Chree A., McConnell I., and Wells G.A.H.: Transmission  of bo- vine  
spongiform  encephalopathy  and  scrapie  to  mice. /.  Gen.  Virol.  73:189l—1897, 1992.
301.  Hunter  G.D.,  Millson  G.C., and Chandler  R.L.: Observations  on  the  comparative  in-
fectivity of cellular  fractions derived  from  homogenates  of mouse-scrapie  brain.  As.
Vet.  Sci. 4:543—549,  1963.
302.  Eklund C.M., Kennedy R.C., and Hadlow W.J.: Pathogenesis of scrapie virus infection in  the 
mouse./. Infect. Dis.  ll7:15—22,  1967.
303.  Will R.G., Ironside J.W., Zeidler M., Cousens  S.N., Estibeiro  K., Alperovitch  A., Poser 
S., Pocchiari M., Hofman A., and Smith  P.G.: A new variant of Creutzfeldt-Jakob dise- ase in the 
UK. Lancet  347:921—925,  1996.
304.  Bateman   D.,  Hilton   D.,  Love   S.,   Zeidler   M.,  Beck  J.,   and  Collinge  J.:   
Sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob  disease  in  a  1 &year-old  in  the  UK  (Lett.) .  Lancet  346:i 
155—1156, 1995.
305.  Britton    T.C.,   Al-Sarraj    S.,   Shaw   C.,   Campbell   T.,   and   Collinge   j.:    
Sporadic CreutzfeldtJakob disease in a 1F›-year-old  in  the UK (Lett.) . Lancet  346: 1155,  1995.
306.  Ironside J.W.: The  new variant  form  of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease:  a novel prion  pro- 
tein amyloid disorder  (Editorial).  Amyloid: Int. J.  Exp.  Clin. Invest.  4:6fi—69,  1997.
307.  Chazot G., Broussolle  E., Lapras C.I., Blattler T., Aguzzi A., and Kopp N.: New variant of 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in a 26-year-old  French  man. Lancet 347: 1181,  1996.
308.  CDC:  Surveillance  for Creutzfeldt-Jakob  Disease—United States.  MMWR  45:665—668,
t996.
309.  Baker  H.F.,  Ridley  R.M.,  and   Wells  G.A.H.:  Experimental  transmission  of  BSE  and 
scrapie  to the  common  marmoset.  Vet. &c. 132:403—406,  1993.
310.  Lasmézas C.I., DeslysJ.-P., Demaimay R., Adjou K.T., Lamour y F., Dormont D., Robain
O.,  Ironside J    and  Hauw J.-J.:  BSE  transmission  to  macaques.  Nature  381:743-744,
1996.
311.  Collinge J., Palmer  M.S., Sidle K.C., Hill A.F., Gowland I., Meads J   Asante E., Bradley 
R., Doey L.J., and  Lantos P.L.:  Unaltered  susceptibility to BSE in  transgenic  mice ex- 
pressing human  prion  protein.  Nature 378:779—783, 1995.
312.  Cousens S.N., Vynnycky E., Zeidler  M., Will R.G., and  Smith  P.G.: Predicting  the CJD 
epidemic in humans.  Nature 385:197—198, 1997.
313.  Raymond  G.J., Hope J., Kocisko D.A., Priola S.A., Raymond  L.D., Bossers A., Ironside J.,  
Will  R.G.,  Chen  S.G.,  Petersen   R.B.,  Gambetti   P.,  Rubenstein   R.,  Smits  M.A., Lansbury 
 P.T., Jr., and  Caughey B.: Molecular  assessment  of  the  potential  transmissi- bilities of BSE 
and  scrapie  to humans.  Nature 388: P85—288, 1997.
314.  Collinge J.,  Sidle  KC.L.,  Meads J.,  Ironside J.,  and  Hill  A.F.:  Molecular  analysis  
of prion  strain  variation  and  the  aetiology  of  “new  variant”  CJD.  Nature  383:685—690, 
1996.

128                                     Physiology or  Medicine  1997

315.  Hill A.F., Desbruslais M., Joiner S., Sidle K.C.L., Gowland I., Collinge J.,  Doey L.J., and
Lantos P.: The same prion  strain  causes vCJD afld BSE. Nature 389:448—450,  1997.
3t6.  Parchi  P.,  Capellari  S.,  Chen  S.G.,  Petersen  R.B.,  Gambetti  P.,  Kopp  P.,  Brown  
P.,
Kitamoto T., Tateishi J.,  Giese A., and Kretzschmar  H.: Typing prion isoforms (Lett.) .
Nature 386:232—233,  1997.
317.  Somerville R.A., Chong A., Mulqueen  O.U., Birkett C.R., Wood S.C.E.R., and Hope J.: 
Biochemical  typing of scrapie strains. Nature 386:564,  1997.
318.  Haraguchi  T., Fisher S., Olofsson  S., Endo T., Groth  D., Tarantino  A., Borchelt D.R.,
Teplow   D.,   Hood   L.,   Burlingame   A.,   Lycke   E.,   Kobata  A.,   and   Prusiner   S.B.: 
Asparagine-linked  glycosylation   of  the  scrapie   and  cellular   prion   proteins.   Arch. 
Biochem.  Biophys.  274: 1—13,  1989.
319.  Endo  T.,  Groth  D.,  Prusiner  S.B.,  and  Kobata A.:  Diversity  of oligosaccharide  
struc- tures  linked  to  asparagines  of the  scrapie  prion  protein.  Biochemistry  
28:8380—8388, 1989.
320.  Wickner  R.B.:  [URE3]  as  an  altered  URE2  protein:  evidence  for  a  prion  analog  in
Saccharom  ces  cerevisiae.  Science 264:566-569,  1994.
321.  Chernoff Y.O., Lindquist S.L., Ono B., Inge-Vechtomov S.G., and Liebman  S.W.: Role of the 
chaperone  protein  Hspl04 in propagation  of the yeast prion-like  factor  [jet’]. Science 
268:889—884,  1995.
322.  Glover J.R., Kowal  A.S.,  Schirmer  E.C.,  Patino  M.M.,  Liu J.-J.,  and Lindquist  S.: 
Self- seeded fibers formed by Sup35,  the protein  determinant  of [PSI“] , a heritable  prion- 
like factor of S. cerevisiae.  Cell 89:811—819,  1997.
323.  King C.-Y., Tittman  P., Gross H., Gebert R., Aebi M., and Wuthrich  K.: Prion-inducing 
domain  2—I 14 of yeast  Sup36  protein  transforms  zn -uitro into amyloid-like  filaments. Proc. 
Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  USA 94:6618—6622,  1997.
324.   Paushkin  S.V., Kushnirov V.V., Smirnov V.N., and Ter-Avanesyan  M.D.: In vitro propa- 
gation  of the prion-like  state of yeast Sup35 protein.  Science 277:38l—383,  1997.
325.  Houston  V., Deleu C., Saupe  S., and Begueret J.:  The protein  product of the  het-s  he- 
terokaryon  incompatibility gene  of the  fungus  Podospora  anserina behaves  as a prion analog. 
Proc. Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  USA 94:977a-9778,  1997.
326.  Derkatch  I.L.,  Chernoff  Y.O.,  Kushnirov  V.V.,  Inge-Vechtomov  S.G.,  and  Liebman S.W.: 
 Genesis  and variability  of  [PSQ  prion  factors  in  Saccharomyces  cede-uisiae.  Cenetirs 144: 
1375—1386,  1996.
327.  Patino M.M., Liu J  -J., Glover J.R., and Lindquist S.: Support for the prion  hypothesis for 
inheritance of a phenotypic  trait in yeast.  Science 273:622—626,  1996.
328.  Wickner R.B.: A new prion controls fungal cell fusion incompatibility [Commentary] .
Proc. Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  USA 94:10012-10014,  1997.
329.  Sonneborn  T.M.: The determination  of hereditary antigenic  differences  in genically 
identical  Paramecium  cells. Proc. Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  USA 34: 41 W4l 8,  1948.
330.  Landman   O.E.:  The   inheritance   of  acquired   characteristics.   Annu.   Reu.   
Genetics
25:1—20,  1991.
331.  Beisson J.  and  Sonneborn  T.M.:  Cytoplasmid  inheritance  of the organization  of  the 
cell cortex of Paramecium  aurelia.  Proc. Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  USA 53:275—282,  1965.
332.  Frankel J.:  Positional  order and cellular handedness. /.  Cell SP. 97:205—21l , 1990.
335.  Chapman J.,  Ben-Israel J.,  Goldhammer  Y., and Korczyn A.D.: The risk of developing 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease  in  subjects with  the PRNP gene codon  200 point mutation. Neurology  
44: I 683—1686,  1994.
334.  Spudich   S.,   Mastrianni   J.A.,   Wrensch   M.,   Gabizon   R.,   Meiner   Z.,   Kahana   
I., Rosenmann  H.,  Kahana  E.,  and  Prusiner  S.B.:  Complete  penetrance  of Creutzfeldt- Jakob 
disease in Libyan Jews carrying  the E200K mutation  in  the prion  protein gene. Mol. Med.  
1:607-613,  1995.
335.  Aguzzi A. and Weissmann  C.: Prion  research:  the  next frontiers.  Nature 389:795—798, 
1997.
336.  Gorodinsky A. and Harris D.A.: Glycolipid-anchored proteins in  neuroblastoma  cells form 
detergent-resistant complexes without caveolin. /.  Cell Biol.  129:619-627,  1995.

Stanley B.  Prusiner                                             129

337.  Goldmann W., Hunter N., Smith G., Fosters., and HopeJ.: PrP genotype and agent ef- fects in 
scrapie: change in allelic interaction with different isolates of agent in sheep, a natural host of 
scrapie. /.  Gen. Virol. 75:989—995,  1994.
338.  Belt  P.B.G.M.,  Muileman  I.H.,  Schreuder  B.E.C.,  Ruijter J.B.,  Gielkens  A.L.J.,  and 
Smits M.A.: Identification of five allelic variants of  the sheep PrP gene and their asso- ciation 
with natural scrapie./.  Cen. Virol. 76:509—517,  1995.
339.  Clousard  C., Beaudry P., Elsen J.M., Milan  D., Dussaucy M., Bounneau  C.,  Schelcher F., 
Chatelain J.,  LaunayJ.M., and Laplanche J.L.: Different allelic effects of the codons 136  and  
171  of  the  prion  protein  gene  in  sheep  with  natural  scrapie. J.   Gen.  Virol. 
76:2097—210I,  1995.
340.  Ikeda T., Horiuchi  M., Ishiguro N., Muramatsu  Y., Kai-Uwe  G.D., and Shinagawa  M.: Amino  
acid polymorphisms  of PrP with  reference  to onset of scrapie  in  Suffolk  and Corriedale  sheep 
in Japan. /. Gen.  biro/. 76:2577—2581,  1995.
341.  Hunter  N., Moore  L., Hosie  B.D.,  Dingwall  W.S.,  and  Greig A.: Association  between 
natural  scrapie  and  PrP  genotype  in  a  flock  of  Suffolk  sheep  in  Scotland.  Vet.  Rec. 
140:59—63,  1997.
342.  Hunter N., Cairns D., FosterJ.D., Smith G., Goldmann W., and Donnelly K:  Is scrapie solely a 
genetic disease? Nature 386:137,  1997.
343.  O'Rourke K.I., Holyoak G.R., Clark W.W., Mickelson J.R., Wang S., Melco R.P., Besser T.E.,  
and  Foote  W.C.:  PrP  genotypes  and  experimental  scrapie  in  orally  inoculated Suffolk sheep 
in  the United  States. J.  Cen.  Virol. 78:975—978,  1997.
344.  Parry H.B.: Scrapie Disease in  Sheep, Academic  Press, New York,  1983.
345.  Chesebro  B.:  Prion  diseases:  BSE  and  prions:  uncertainties  about  the  agent.  
Science
279:42—43,  1998.
346.  Shinde  U.P.,  Liu J.J., and Inouye  M.: Protein  memory through  altered  folding  medi- 
ated by intramolecular chaperones.  Nature 389:520-522,  1997.
