SOMATIC GENERATION OF IMMUNE
DIVERSITY

Nobel lecture, December 8, 1987

by
SUSUMU TONEGAWA

Center for Cancer Research and Department of Biology, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, U.S.A.




One day in the fall of 1970, I received an airmail letter from Renato Dulbecco
who was travelling in Europe. At that time I was a postdoctoral fellow in his
laboratory at the Salk Institute. The letter, written on stationery of the Hotel
Hassler in Rome said:
    “Dear Susumu,
   I don’t know what arrangements you have made for after your departure
from La Jolla at the end of the year but I would like to mention to you another
possibility. The Institute of Immunology in Basel, Switzerland will start oper-
ating in a month. They already have an excellent collection of immunologists,
but have not yet built an adequate background in molecular biology. I talked
about you to Niels Jerne, the Director, and they are interested in having you
there … There are many immunologically interesting phenomena obtained
with crude RNA preparations but they are unreliable because RNA is not
characterized. In general, it seems the best system for understanding develop-
ment at a molecular level and you may like to get into such a field. If you are
interested, write to Niels K. Jerne, Basel Institute for Immunology, 487 Gren-
zacherstrasse...”
   Thanks partly to this remarkably prophetic letter and partly to the U.S.
immigration law that prevented me from remaining in the U.S.A., in February
 1971 I found myself in this cozy Swiss town almost completely surrounded by
immunologists. For someone who had had no formal training in immunology
whatsoever and had never even visited Switzerland, it was a rather drastic
change. Indeed, the first twelve months at the Base1 Institute were not easy.
    After I arrived in Basel I initially attempted to continue the project of my
days in Dulbecco’s laboratory, namely, the transcriptional control of the simian
 virus 40 genes. However, I soon realized that this was not a subject that aroused
 great interest in an Institute almost entirely staffed by immunologists nor one
 that allowed me to take full advantage of my many talented colleagues. I
 therefore decided to learn immunology by talking to them, reading papers, and
 asking questions. An immunologist, Ita Askonas, and a geneticist, Charlie

                                                                               381


382                           Physiology or Medicine 1987


Steinberg, became my tutors and were most helpful to me in getting into a new
field. It was during this process that I was introduced’ to the problem of the
origin of antibody diversity.

The problem
Immunologists agreed that an individual vertebrate synthesizes many millions
of structurally different forms of antibody molecules even before it encounters
an antigen. Moreover, Gerald Edelman and Rodney Porter had shown that a
typical antibody molecule is composed of two identical light chains and two
identical heavy chains (1,2). It had also been found that each of these two types
of chain exhibits great sequence variability in the amino terminal region
between one antibody molecule and the next and little sequence variability in
the carboxyl terminal regions (3). These two regions were then referred to as
 the variable, or V, and the constant, or C, regions. However, immunologists
 and geneticists were divided for many years into two schools of thought with
respect to the issue of whether the genetic diversity required for the synthesis of
these proteins is generated during evolution and is carried in the germline or
during development in which case it would be present in somatic but not
germline cells. One school of thought held that the germline must include a
separate gene for every polypeptide that ultimately appears in an antibody
molecule (4). In this germline theory, antibody or immunoglobulin genes are
expressed in exactly the same way as those for any other protein, and no special
gene-processing mechanisms are needed. On the other hand, the model re-
quires an enormous number of immunoglobulin genes inherited from the
parents. While the four chain structure of an immunoglobulin molecule allows
diversity to be generated by chain paring, the number of genes required for
both light and heavy chains is still very large. One major difficulty for germline
theories of antibody diversity was the observation that all antibody polypeptide
chains of a given type share a common genetic marker (allotype) that segre-
gates as a single Mendelian gene. If there were many thousands of light and
heavy chain genes, how could the same genetic marker in all of these genes
have been maintained?
   The second theory supposed that there are only a limited number of anti-
body genes in the germline, and that these genes somehow diversify as the
antibody-forming B lymphocytes emerge from their stem cells. In other words,
 the diversification of antibody gene sequences takes place in specialized somat-
ic, or body, cells rather than being carried from generation to generation by the
germ cells (5-7). One attraction of this latter theory is that it relieves the host
of the need to commit a disproportionately large fraction of the inherited genes
to code for antibodies, but the theory demands an unprecedented mechanism
for diversifying the inherited genes somatically.
   Arguments for and against these contrasting ideas were made both vocally
and in written form for many years. However, all of these arguments were
based on the interpretation of amino acid sequences of immunoglobulin poly-
peptide chains or on the generally accepted principles of evolution and gene-
tics. No direct evidence for either view had been obtained. This was because no


                          Somatic Generation of Immune Diversity                383



technique was available that would allow an analysis of the line structure of
specific genes from higher organisms.

Gene counting
In the early seventies the technology for purifying a specific eukaryotic mRNA
was just becoming available. Furthermore, a method to determine the number
of copies of a specific gene by kinetic analysis of nucleic acid hybridization had
already been established (8,9). These technical developments led some scien-
tists, including myself, to think that one can experimentally determine the
number of immunoglobulin genes contained in a germline genome and thereby
decide which of the two major theories of antibody diversity is correct. The
validity of this approach is based in part on the fact that the V region of a given
chain type, while being different, exhibits a high degree of amino acid sequence
homology. It was therefore thought that mRNA coding for a specific immunoglo-
bulin polypeptide chain would hybridize not only with its own gene but also
with many other immunoglobulin genes, if they existed in a germline genome.
   I thus obtained mouse myeloma cells and put my effort to purifying immuno-
globulin mRNA and carrying out the hybridization studies. However, the
initial studies focusing on the mouse χ light chain and heavy chain genes gave
ambiguous results. The difficulty was primarily due to uncertainty about the
purity of the mRNA used as the hybridization probe as well as a lack of
knowledge on the extent to which a probe will hybridize with. the related but
not identical genes, and the precise effect of sequence differences on hybridiza-
tion kinetics. Thus, it turned out to be nearly impossible to make a convincing
interpretation of the data obtained in these early studies in relation to the issue
of the evolutionary versus somatic generation of antibody diversity.
   One subsequent series of experiments which I carried out on genes coding for
the mouse h light chains, however, was very encouraging (10). Using a mRNA
preparation that was more than 95% pure, I could show that the mouse λ light
chain gene is reiterated no more than the ß globin gene. The latter gene had
been shown to be essentially unique. Fortunately, Weigert, Cohn and their
coworkers had identified at least eight different         region sequences among
BALB/c-derived myelomas (11). Since these V regions were highly homolo-
gous, differing by only one, two or three amino acid residues, it was very likely
that the corresponding genes would crosshybridize extensively if they existed
 separately in the germline genome. Furthermore, statistical analysis of λ light
 chain-secreting myelomas strongly suggested that a BALB/c mouse has the
capacity to synthesize many more than the eight different        regions identified.
 Thus, the number of mouse λ genes determined experimentally (no more
 than a few) was far smaller than the number of different          regions (at least
eight, most probably many more) detected in proteins. On the basis of these
results I-was convinced that a somatic diversification occurs in this gene
system.


384                          Physiology or Medicine I987


Rearrangement
In the meantime I became aware that some immunologists had been speculat-
ing that immunoglobulin polypeptide chains may be encoded by two separate
DNA segments, one each for the V and C regions. Drawing an analogy from
the elegant Campbell model (12) on the integration and excision of a phage λ
genome, Dreyer and Bennett had further suggested that one of many “V
genes” may be excised out from the original chromosomal position and joined
with the single “C gene” in an immunoglobulin-producing B cell ( 13). This
model successfully explained the maintenance of the common genetic marker in
all immunoglobulin polypeptide chains of a given type by postulating a single
C gene for that chain type. Although a somatic recombination between the “V
and C genes” is an inherent aspect of the model it is clearly a version of the
germline theory of antibody diversity because the model assumed that the
germline genome carries many “V genes”, one for every V region that an
organism can synthesize.
    When the Dreyer and Bennett model was published in 1965, it was notwidely
 accepted by biologists. This is understable because the model was built on
 two hypotheses, both of which violated the then current dogmas of biology. These
 were the principles of one gene encoding one polypeptide chain and of the
constancy of the genome during ontogeny and cell differentiation. My personal
reaction to the model when I learned of it in the early nineteen seventies was
also that of skepticism. However, at the same time I thought that the model
might be testable if one were to use restriction enzymes. While in Dulbecco’s
laboratory I had heard of Daniel Nathan’s breakthrough in the analysis of the
 SV40 genome by an application of the then newly discovered restriction
enzymes (14). As one who used to struggle to define the transcriptional units of
 this DNA virus I was keenly aware of the power of these enzymes for the
analysis of DNA structure. However, an extension of the restriction enzyme
analysis from a viral genome of 5 x l03 base pairs to the 2 x 109 base pair
genome of an eucaryote as complex as a mouse, required the use of an
additional trick for the detection of a specific DNA fragment in a vast array of
irrelevant fragments. An obvious solution seemed to lie in the combination of
an electrophoretic separation of enzyme-digested DNA and the sensitive tech-
 nique of nucleic acid hybridization. I discussed with Charlie Steinberg the need
for developing a method that allows an in situ detection of a specific DNA
 sequence among the electrophoretically fractionated DNA fragments, but we
 really could not come up with a good idea worthy of exploring. As we all now
know, a very simple and elegant method ideal for this purpose was later
developed by Edward Southern ( 15).
    A few weeks passed by before I accidentally saw in one of the Institute’s cold
 rooms a huge plexiglass tray in which someone was fractionating serum pro-
 teins by starch gel electrophoresis. I thought one may be able to fractionate a
sufficient amount of digested DNA in a gel of such dimensions, so that the DNA
 eluted from gel slices could be used for liquid phase hybridization. A quick
 calculation indicated that the experiment was feasible. Nobumichi Hozumi,
 a postdoctoral fellow in my laboratory, and I therefore decided to give


                         Somatic Generation of Immune Diversity                385



it a try although we were keenly aware of the intense labor required by this type
of experiment. As hybridization probes we used purified χ or λ light chain
mRNA (V+C-probe) and its 3’-half fragment (C-probe) that had been iodinat-
ed to a high specific activity. The rationale of the experiment was as follows:
First, if an immunoglobulin polypeptide chain is encoded by two “genes” V
and C in the germline genome, it is highly probable that treatment with a
restriction enzyme will separate these DNA sequences into fragments of dis-
tinct size, germline genome, it is highly probable that treatment with a restric-
tion enzyme will separate these DNA sequences into fragments of distinct size,
thus allowing their electrophoretic separation. Second, if a somatic rearrange-
ment joins the V and C “genes ” it is also highly probable that the myeloma
DNA digested with the same restriction enzyme will contain a DNA fragment
carrying both V and C “genes”.
   The results obtained were clear cut: To our pleasant surprise the patterns of
hybridization of the embryo (a substitute of germline) DNA and a x-myeloma
DNA were not only drastically different but also consistent with the occurrence
of separate V and C “genes” and a joined V plus C gene, respectively (16). We
were of course aware of the alternative interpretations of the results, such as a
fortuitious modification of the enzyme cleavage sites in one of the two types of
DNA. However, we considered these alternative explanations of the results
unlikely because they all required multiple fortuitious events. Our confidence
was fortified soon afterwards as the development of Southern -blot techniques
allowed us to carry out more extensive analyses using a variety of restriction
enzymes and myeloma cells.

Joining of gene segments
While the experiments with restriction enzymes were informative, details of the
rearrangement were difficult to come by with this approach. Forunately, re-
combinant DNA technology was just becoming available and was the ideal
means for this purpose. Debates on the possible hazards of this type of research
were flaring initially in the United States and shortly afterwards in European
countries. In order to make sure that our research would not become a target of
 controversy, Charlie and I got in touch with Werner Arber at the University of
 Base1 who was coordinating recombinant DNA research activities in Switzer-
 land. A small informal working group was set up by the local researchers
 interested in this technique. The consensus of the group, which was supported
 by most of the other Swissresearchers, was that we should all follow the practices
 and guidelines being adopted in the United States. We met about once a month
 and exchanged information regarding both ethical and practical aspects of the
 technology.
    On the basis of the previous experiments attempting to count immunoglobu-
 lin genes, I thought that it would be wise to start with the mouse λ light chain
 system, the simplest of all chain types that had been studied. Our goal was to
 clone the     and     “genes” in the germline state from embryonic cells as well
 as the rearranged V plus C “genes” from a λ myeloma, and to determine the
 relationship between these genomic DNA clones by electronmicroscopy and


386                          Physiology or Medicine 1987


DNA sequencing. No precedent existed at that time for cloning “unique”
eucaryotic genes. We therefore had to devise a few tricks as we attempted to
clone the first immunoglobulin gene. For instance, our available probe at that
time was again 95 % pure mRNA rather than a cDNA clone. This situation
made the screening of a large number of DNA clones difficult because of the
high background. To avoid this problem we pre-enriched the λ gene-containing
genomic DNA fragments as much as possible using preparative R-loop forma-
tion (17,18), so that the DNA library constructed would have the clone of
interest at a high frequency.
   Starting with the embryonic DNA we could isolate a clone that clearly
hybridized specifically with the λ mRNA (18). When an electronmicroscopist,
Christine Brack, h h d joined. t us from the Biozentrum of the University
of Basel, examined the mixture of this clone and λ mRNA that had been
annealed under an appropriate condition, she found a beautiful R-loop from
which about a half of the mRNA strand protruded. This and additional
analysis convinced us that we had cloned a     “gene” to which no C “gene” was
contiguously attached, thus confirming at the DNA clone level that the V
and C “genes” are indeed separate in the germline genome. A subsequent
DNA sequencing study carried out in collaboration with Allan Maxam and
Walter Gilbert of Harvard University revealed that this DNA clone corre-
sponded to the V “gene” for the λ2 subtype ( 19).
   In the meantime Minoru Hirama, another postdoctoral fellow, succeded in
preparing λ and χ cDNA clones. Once these probes became available isolation
of the genomic clones became much easier. My assistant Rita Schuller and I
isolated a number of genomic DNA clones from λ and χ chain-synthesizing
myelomas as well as from embryos (20,21). Analysis of these DNA clones by
electromicroscopy, by restriction enzyme mapping and by DNA sequencing,
not only confirmed the somatic rearrangement of immunoglobulin genes but
also revealed some striking features of their arrangement and rearrangement
 (Fig. 1). These can be summarized as follows:
1. Although the V and C “genes” are rearranged and are much closer to each
    other in myeloma cells than in embryo cells, they are not contiguous and are
    separated by a few kilobases of DNA sequence that does not participate in
    coding of the polypeptide chain. This untranslated DNA sequence present
    within the rearranged, complete immunoglobulin gene was unanticipated
    and was also among the first demonstrations of an intron in eucaryotic genes
    (22).
2. The V “gene” found in the germline genome is about 13 codons short when
    it is compared to the length of the conventionally defined V region. The
    missing codons were found in a short stretch of DNA referred to as a J (or
   joining) gene segment that is located many kilobases away from the incom-
    plete V “gene” (referred to as a V gene segment) and a few kilobases
    upstream of the C “gene” (also referred to as a C gene segment). In
    myeloma cells the rearrangement event attaches the J gene segment to the V
    gene segment and thereby creates a complete V region “gene” (20,23).
3. The signal peptide is encoded in yet another DNA segment referred to as the


                             Somatic Generation of Immune Diversity                         387




                                                  TRANSCRIPTION




Figure 1. The basic scheme for rearrangement and expression of an immunoglobulin light chain
gene. At top is an arrangement of the gene segments on a germline grnome. Somatic rearrangement
links the V and J gene segment and generates a complete light chain gene shown just below the
germline genomc. The entire gene containing the leader exon (L), the V region exon (V and J), the
C region exon (C), and the introns present between these exons are transcribed into a premRNA in
the nuclei of the B cell. The premRNA is processed by RNA splicing as it is transported from the
nuclei to the cytoplasm. The resulting mRNA, devoid of introns, is translated in the endoplasmic
reticulum into a nascent polypeptide chain from which a mature λ light chain is generated after
cleavage of the signal peptide.




   L (or leader) exon that is separated from the V gene segment by a short
   intron (19,23).
  Finding that the     “gene” was split into two gene segments,    and     in
the germline genome was completely unexpected. But as soon as this discovery
was made its implication for the somatic generation of antibody diversity was
obvious. If the germline genome carries multiple copies of different V and J
gene segments the number of complete V “genes” that can be generated by


388                                 Physiology or Medicine I987


random joinings between these two types of gene segments would be much
greater than the total number of the inherited gene segments. Thus, contrary to
the Dreyer and Bennett original concept, DNA rearrangement could provide a
major means for the somatic diversification of antibody molecules. The amino
acid sequence data of the χ light and heavy chains were consistent with the
view that the germline genome carries multiple different V and J gene seg-
ments (24,25). Indeed, the nucleotide sequence analysis of the mouse K chain
gene complex carried out both in my laboratory and in Phillip Leder’s labora-
tory at The United States National Institutes of Health confirmed that a
germline genome contains multiple V and J gene segments and that these gene
segments are joined in different combinations in each myeloma cell (20,26).
Four different J x gene segments were found several kilobases upstream of the
gene segment. The exact number of       gene segments is unknown even today,
but it is estimated to be two to three hundred (27).

Heavy chain genes
Inasmuch as an immunoglobulin heavy chain is also composed of V and C
regions, it was reasonable to expect that its gene also would undergo the type of
DNA rearrangement discribed for the light chain genes. This supposition was
confirmed by Leroy Hood and his coworkers at California Institute of Technol-




Figure 2. Organization of the immunoglobulin heavy chain gene family. At top, middle, and bottom
are organization in a germline genome, in a genome of B cells synthesizing a µ class heavy chain,
and in a genome of a plasma cell synthesizing a g class heavy chain, respectively. A mouse haploid
genome carries several hundred different V gene segments, about a dozen D gene segments, four J
gene segments, and one copy of C gene segment for each of the eight different classes or subclasses
of immunoglobulin heavy chains. In a virgin B cell one copy each of the      D, and J gene segment
pools have been linked up and the joined V D J DNA sequence is transcribed into a premRNA
together with the    gene segment. In different B cells of the same organism a different set of    D,
and J gene segments are usually hooked up and expressed. As the virgin B cell differentiates
either to a plasma cell or to a memory B cell (see Fig. 5) the second type of somatic recombination
called “switch recombination” often occurs between a region         located upstream of the       gene
segment and another region       located upstream of the     gene segment. As shown at the bottom,
the switch recombination replaces the     gene segment with the      gene segment without changing
the V D J exon. Filled circles designate transcriptional promotors present at the upstream of every
V gene segment. The open circle designates the transcriptional enhancer (102, 103) which together
with the promotor activate the rearranged heavy chain gene for a high level expression,


                        Somatic Generation 0f Immune Diversity                389



ogy and by ourselves (Fig. 2) (28,29). As in Κ genes four J gene segments
were found several kilobases upstream of the C gene segments coding for the C
region of the µ class heavy chain. Multiple V gene segments were also identi-
fied.
   While these features of the organization of heavy chain genes are essentially
the same as those of the light chain genes, one observation made during these
studies suggested that the somatic assembly of gene segments plays an even
more prominent role in the diversification of heavy chains than of light chains.
It was found that from one or two to a dozen amino acid codons that are
present in the V-J junction region of the assembled gene are not found in either
of the apparently corresponding germline V or J gene segments (30,31). This
suggested that a third type of short gene segment referred to as D (or diversity)
might participate in the somatic assembly of a heavy chain gene. Indeed,
Hitoshi Sakano and Yoshi Kurosawa, two postdoctoral fellows in my laborato-
ry, soon discovered about a dozen D gene segments (32,33) which were
subsequently mapped in a region upstream of the J cluster in the germline
genome (34,35). Thus, the construction of a complete heavy chain V “gene”
requires two DNA recombinational events, one joining a V with a D gene
 segment and the other the same D with a J gene segment.

Recombination Rule
The joining of V-J or V-D-J involves a site-specific recombination. It might
therefore be expected that these gene segments would carry sequences in the
vicinity of the joining ends that are recognized by a putative site-specific
recombinase. Furthermore, such recognition sequences are likely to be com-
mon for all gene segments of a given type (e.g.       because they all seem to be
capable of joining with the common set of gene segments of the appropriate
type (e.g.       . There are indeed a heptamer and a nonamer that are conserved
in the region immediately downstream of each              gene segment (Fig. 3)
(36,37). Sequences complementary to the        heptamer and nonamer were also
found in the region immediately upstream of each of the four      gene segments.
The same sets of sequences were also found in the corresponding regions of the
    and     gene segments (36). When the heavy chain V and J gene segments
were analyzed subsequently they too had the common conserved sequences
 (30,31). Furthermore, D gene segments carry the heptamer and nonamer
sequences both upstream and downstream (32,33). Another interesting feature
of these putative recognition sequences is the fact that the length of the spacer
between the heptamer and nonamer is either about 12 or 23 base pairs (30,3 1).
Furthermore, a gene segment carrying a recognition sequence with one type of
 spacer is able to join only with a gene segmentwith the spacer of the other type.
This 12/23 base pair spacer rule seems to be adhered to strictly. Little is
 currently known about the recombinase, but proteins with an affinity to
 the heptamer or nonamer have been identified in the extract of Abelson virus
transformed pre B cell lines in which the rearrangement occurs in vitro at a
relatively high frequency (38,39).


                                   Physiology or Medicine 1987




Figure 3. Putative recognition sequences for the rearrangement of immunoglobulin and T cell
receptor genes. The conserved heptamer and nonamer sequences and the length of the spacer
between these sequences are schematically illustrated for immunoglobulin (Panel a) and for T cell
receptor (Panel b) gene families. The sequences shown on top are consensus sequences. Individual
sequences may deviate from these consensus sequences by a few nucleotides.




 Diversity generated at the joins
 When the deduced amino acid sequence of a germline                 gene segment was
 compared with the determined amino acid sequences of those χ chains that are
 encoded in part by that         gene segment, it was noticed that the 5’ end of the
 gene segment is not prefixed but rather shifts toward upstream or downstream
 by several base pairs in different joining events (36,37). This flexibility in the
 precise site of the joining was subsequently found to be a characteristic of the
joining ends of other gene segments rather than of just J X -gene segments (31).
 It applies even when the same pair of gene segments were joined in different B


                               Somatic Generation of Immune Diversity                           391



cell precursors, such that the completed V “genes” are likely to have slightly
different codons in the junction regions.
   The V-D and D-J junctions exhibit diversity of yet another type. We found
that up to a dozen base pairs of essentially random sequence are inserted in
these junctions apparently without a template during the breakage and reunion
of the recombining gene segments (32,33). While the precise mechanism is yet
unknown, the terminal deoxynucleotide transferase which is found in early B
lymphatic nuclei or an enzyme with similar characteristics is thought to play a
role in this phenomenon, (40).
   The part of the V region affected by the above two diversification mecha-
nisms is limited. But this does not mean that they do not play a significant role
in the determination of antibody specificity. On the contrary, the junctions
encode the most variable two of the six loops of polypeptides that make up the
 antigen binding region of the antibody molecule (Fig. 4). Furthermore,
 specific cases are known where the affinity of an antibody to a defined antigen is
 drastically altered by a slight change in one junctional sequence (41). Thus, the
junctional variation is also a potent somatic generator of antibody diversity.




Figure 4. Space-filling, stereo image of an antibody combining site. Atomic coordinates of mouse
immunoglobulin MOPC 603 (104) were used to produce the picture. The heavy chain variable
domain is color-coded dark grey, the light chain variable domain light grey. The hypervariable
regions [except the VH third hypervariable region) are blue, the heavy chain segment coded for by
the D gene is red, and the heavy and light chain segments coded for by the J genes are yellow. The
D segment corresponds virtually exactly to the third heavy chain hypervariable region; hypervari-
able regions were defined as in Novotney et al. (105) except for the heavy chain second hypervaria-
ble region, which is marked as defined by Kabat et al. (25). The antigen of this particular
immunoglobulin, phosphoryl choline, binds into the cavity in the middle of the picture in between
the VH and VL domains, making contacts to amino acid residues belonging to the VH and J
segments of the heavy chain and the VL segment of the light chain. Importance of the D segment is
well illustrated in the two crystallographic structures of antibodies which bind the protein antigen
lysozyme (106, 107). There, the contact area contributed by the D segment amount to 50% and
24%, respectively, of the total heavy chain contact area. This image was computer-generated by
Jiri Novotny using the program SPHERE of Robert Bruccoleri.


392



Somatic mutation
When F. Macfarlane Burnet proposed the clonal selection theory he recognized
the need for some kind of random genetic process in order to generate anti-
bodies able to bind specifically to the vast variety of antigens (42). He consid-
ered somatic mutations as the most plausible mechanism. Subsequently, this
idea was adopted and forcefully presented by many including Joshua Lederberg,
Niels Kaj Jerne and Melvin Cohn (5,6,7).
  The amino acid sequence data accumulated by Martin Weigert in Melvin
Cohn’s laboratory at the Salk Institute provided an excellent opportunity to
examine directly the role of somatic mutations in antibody diversity (7,11).
They had analyzed the λ1 light chains derived from eighteen myelomas. All the
mice were of an inbred strain BALB/c and should thus have been genetically
identical. They found that twelve of the        regions were identical but that the
other six differed both from the majority sequence and from one another by
only one, two, or three amino acid residues. They proposed that BALB/c mice
may carry only one germline           “gene” which codes for the majority se-
quence, and that all the other         regions observed are encoded by somatic
mutants of this single       “gene” that arose in B cell development. As I already
mentioned in an earlier section our gene-counting experiment by hybridization
kinetics suggested that the germline BALB/c genome carries no more than a
few       “genes”. This number was reduced to one when we reevaluated the
copy number by the more reliable Southern blotting method (20). The final
proof of somatic mutation in       came when we cloned and sequenced the sole
germline       gene segment and the rearranged λ1 genes expressed in a myeloma
(23). As Weigert and Cohn guessed the nucleotide sequence of the germline
gene segment corresponded to the major amino acid sequence, while the λ 1
gene expressed in the myeloma had been altered by single base changes.
   Since this work several subsets of χ light and heavy chains and their germline
V gene segments have been analyzed by cloning and sequencing (43-46).
These results have all confirmed that somatic mutations further amplify the
diversity encoded in the germline genome. Particularly revealing was the
analysis carried out by Patricia J. Gearhart, Leroy Hood and their coworkers
for the      regions associated with the binding of phosphorylclorine (PC). They
demonstrated the single base changes can be extensive and yet are restricted to
the joined VDJ sequences and the immediately adjacent regions (47,48).

Developmental control of rearrangement and hypermutation
Why have two extraordinary somatic genetic mechanisms, recombination and
hypermutation, evolved in the immune system in order to carry out what
appears to be one task, namely to diversify antibodies?
   I believe that the answer may be the differential roles of these two genetic
mechanisms. Thanks to the efforts of several independent groups of cellular
and molecular immunologists a general picture is emerging that describes the
relationship between the stages of B cell development and the occurance of
somatic recombination or mutation (Fig. 5) (49-55). Somatic recombina-
tions contributing to diversity are initiated first for the heavy chain and then for


                               Somatic Generation of Immune Diversity                          393




Figure 5. Differentiation of B cells. Note that the receptors present on the memory cells and the
antibody molecules secreted by the plasma cells of the secondary response have a tighter fit to the
antigen than the receptors on the ancestral virgin B cells or the antibodies secreted by the plasma
cells of the primary response. See text for the full explanation.




the light chain during the differentiation of progenitor cells, and the completion
of somatic recombination is accompanied by the appearance of virgin B cells
(56-58). These B cells form clones each of which is composed of cells bearing
homogeneous IgM molecules as surface receptors. Thus, somatic recombina-
tion is completed prior to any possible interaction of a B cell with antigens.
   When an antigen enters the lymphatic system for the first time, it will be
screened by these virgin B cells. The small fraction of these B cells that happen
to have sufficient affinity for the antigenic determinants in question will re-
spond and follow either of two pathways: they will produce the primary
antibody response, or they will contribute to the generation of memory B cells.


394                           Physiology or Medicine 1987


In the former pathway, the selected B cells will proliferate and differentiate into
antibody-secreting plasma cells. During this process, the C region of the heavy
chain can switch from µ to another class, but mutation is rare in either the
heavy or the light chain V region. Consequently, the antibodies secreted by
plasma cells in the primary response would largely have the same V regions as
the immunoglobulin receptors on the virgin B cells from which they derive.
   By contrast, immunoglobulin remains in the cell surface receptor form
during the other pathway taken by the antigen-activated virgin B cells, namely
the generation of memory B cells. ‘During this process the hypermutation
apparatus appears to be most active, and the rate of the mutation approaches
10 -3 base substitution per cell per generation. Antigen selects, in a stepwise
fashion, better and better fitting mutants so that the immunoglobulins on the
surface of memory B cells achieve a substantially higher affinity than the
immunoglobulins on the ancestral virgin B cells. Switch recombination also
occurs frequently during this process too. When the same antigen as the one
that elicited the primary response reenters the body, the memory B cells are
selectively propagated and differentiate into plasma cells. This is the so called
secondary antibody response, which, therefore, consists of high affinity anti-
bodies of “mature” isotype, and these antibodies show extensive somatic muta-
tion in their V regions. Somatic mutations appear to cease after memory cells
are generated, and little or no further mutation takes place during the secon-
dary antibody response.
   This scheme of B cell differentiation can be rephrased as follows. An organ-
ism is prepared for infection with pathogens bearing virtually any antigens with
a large variety of resting B cells. These B cells bear unique immunoglobulin
receptors encoded by one copy each of complete light and heavy chain genes
 that have been constructed by a random or quasi-random assembly of the
 inherited gene segments. Since the assembly occurs independent of antigens,
and since the inherited gene segments are not usually selected during evolution
for precise lit to most antigens, the antibody secreted by the plasma cells
derived directly from the selected resting virgin B cells during a primary
antibody response usually have a relatively low affinity. By contrast, the
frequent single base changes that occur during the generation of memory B
cells provide the organism with a great variety of finely altered immunoglobu-
lin receptors from which only those with the best fit to the antigen in question
will be selected. Since the plasma cells generated during the secondary anti-
body response are mostly direct descendants of these memory B cells, having
no further alterations in the antigencombining sites, these antibodies usually
exhibit a much higher affinity for the antigen than do the primary antibodies. This
explains the long known phenomenon of affinity maturation of antibodies
during the course of repeated immunizations (59).
   Thus, somatic creation of antibody genes can be viewed as a two step process.
In the first step, blocks of gene segments are employed to build, in an antigen-
independent fashion, a set of genes coding for antibodies of great diversity but
with low affinity. In the second step, once the antigen is defined, a small
selected set of B cells bearing low affinity antibodies as cell surface receptors


                         Somatic Generation of Immune Diversity                 395



undergo somatic mutations with the result that a fraction of them develop a
higher affinity to that antigen and can be selected for further expansion. This
process improves the ability of the immune system to detect a low concentra-
tion of antigens. One wonders what happens to those cells in which mutation
did not improve affinity. A recent study suggests that at least some of these cells
maybe set aside for selection by different antigens (54). Thus, somatic mutation
may also contribute to the repertoire of receptors specific for antigens not
previously introduced into an immune system.

T cell receptors
As the mystery of the genetic origin of antibody diversity was unravelled at
least in its basic outlines, it seemed natural to extend our research to “the other
half” of the lymphoid system, namely T cells. Although WC often discussed the
idea of research on the nature of antigen recognition by T cells in the laboratory
in the late seventies while I was still in Basel, the real work did not start until
the early eighties in my new laboratory at M.I.T. Although T cells were known
to recognize and distinguish antigens as precisely as B cells, nothing was known
about the biochemical nature of the molecules responsible for this task, namely
T cell receptors (TCR). This lack of information was in stark contrast to the
wealth of information about antibodies. Much debate took place among cellu-
lar immunologists on the nature of these molecules. Some argued that T cell
receptors are just another class of immunoglobulins. Others thought T cell
receptors would have to be quite different from immunoglobulins. Indeed
studies carried out in the late seventies had shown that the way in which a T
cell recognizes an antigen is quite different from the way a B cell does: The T
cell reacts to antigens on a cell surface, and the T cell receptor simultaneously
recognizes both an antigen and a determinant present on a glycoprotein
encoded by a gene in the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) (60-62).
This discovery raised another issue: Does a T cell recognize two determinants
with one receptor or does it have two receptors, one for antigen and the other
for a MHC product?
   The receptor protein was first detected in 1983 in cxpcriments carried out by
three independent groups of scientists headed by James P. Allison, Ellis L.
Reinherz, and Phillipa Marrack and John Kappler (63-65). They prepared
 antibodies that bind to a protein on the T cell surface. Since these proteins
were similar but exhibited clonally distributed structural diversity, they were
thought to be a good candidate for the receptor. Furthermore, the antibodies
 they prepared were T cell clone-specific, and they could show that these
 antibodies blocked activation of the T cell clone in a clone-specific fashion. The
receptor identified by these experiments was composed of two polypeptide
subunits, designated a and b, that are held together by a disulfide bond. These
studies were critical in the sense that the receptor was finally identified, its
overall structure defined, and its predicted structural variability confirmed.
 However, the paucity of the protein on the T cell surface and the absence of the
 secreted form of the receptor made it very difficult to obtain further information
 about the structure of this molecule, especially its amino acid sequence.


396                           Physiology or Medicine 1987



α and ß genes
In the meantime, molecular biologists were attempting to identify the genes
coding for the T cell receptor. This turned out to be a much more difficult
endeavor than the cloning of immunoglobulin genes. Although T cell lines and
hybridomas expressing a homogeneous receptor were becoming available,
these cells were more difficult to grow than myelomas, and the amount of the
receptor made was at least two orders of magnitude less than the amount of
immunoglobulin produced by a myeloma cell. In 1984, Mark Davis and his
coworkers at Stanford University and Tak Mak and his coworkers at the
University of Toronto independently made a breakthrough (66-68). Their
experimental strategy depended on two assumptions. First that mRNAs coding
for the α and β polypeptide chains are present in a T cell hybridoma or T cell
tumor but are absent in B cell tumors. And second that the α and β chain genes
are rearranged in T cells in a manner similar to the immunoglobulin genes in B
cells. Thus, they made a library from the fraction of T cell-cDNA that did not
hybridize with B cell-derived mRNA and tested each T cell-specific cDNA
clone for rearrangement of the corresponding gene in T cells. As the source of T
cells, Davis’ group used a hybridoma obtained by fusing a mouse helper T cell
recognizing antigen plus self class II MHC molecules with a T cell tumor while
Mak’s group used a human T cell tumor. The two groups came up with one
common class of cDNA clones that satisfied the above criteria. The nucleotide
sequence showed that the corresponding polypeptide chain is significantly
(30-35%) homologous to immunoglobulin chains. Furthermore, the cDNA
clones contained sequences homologous to V and C regions in the correct
orientation. Thus, it seemed certain that the gene represented by this class of
cDNA clones codes for one of the two subunits of the T cell receptor. That this
gene encodes the β subunit was soon confirmed by determination of the partial
amino acid sequence of the human β chain (69).
   In my laboratory at M.I.T. Haruo Saito and I collaborated with David
Kranz and Herman Eisen to isolate both α and β cDNA clones from another
type of T cell, namely a cytotoxic T cell clone specific for class I MHC
 molecule. In 1984, using a modified subtractive cDNA library method, we
 identified two classes of cDNA clones that also satisfied the criteria for a T cell
receptor gene (70). One class of these clones represented the β subunit. Taken
together with the earlier finding by Davis’ group this demonstrated that the
two major classes of T cells, helper T cells and cytotoxic T cells, employ the
same set of genes at least for the β subunit. The same conclusion was drawn
subsequently for the α subunit. This point is significant because the two types
of T cell are specific for two distinct subclasses of MHC gene products. Thus,
the same T cell receptor genes mediate recognition of both class I and class II
MHC.
   The polypeptide chains encoded by the other class of rearranging T cell-
specific cDNAs isolated by Saito and myself was also homologous to immunog-
lobulin chains by 30-35%. These cDNA clones were, however, clearly distinct
from ß cDNA clones because the polypeptide chains encoded by the two sets of
cDNAs were homologous by only 30-35% not only in the V regions but also in


                         Somatic Generation of Immune Diversity               397



the C regions. Since only two subunits, α and β, were known for the T cell
receptor, we initially proposed that this second class of cDNAs represented the
α gene (70). However, even before the work was published a question arose
about the assignment of this gene as encoding the α chain. The putative α
cDNAs do not carry codons for N-linked glycosylation sites, while unpublished
studies from Charlie Janeway’s laboratory at Yale University and from Jim
Allison’s at the University of California, Berkeley, indicated that both α and β
subunits of at least some T cells carry N-linked carbohydrates. While it was
still possible that the apparent discrepancy in glycosylation could be explained
by differences in the type of T cell or in mouse strains used, continued screening
of our subtracted cDNA library yielded within a few weeks a third class of
clones whose genes also rearrange specifically in T cells (71). This gene not
only was as homologous to immunoglobulin genes as the first two classes of T
cell-specific genes, but also had two potential sites for N-linked glycosylation,
and therefore was a better candidate for the a gene. This proposition was soon
confirmed by comparing its nucleotide sequence with the partial amino acid
sequence of the human         subunit (72). Furthermore, the a gene was also
cloned at about the same time’ from a helper hybridoma (73).
   Once cDNA encoding the α and β chains were identified, it was straightfor-
ward to determine the organization of the corresponding genes in genomic
DNA. These studies demonstrated that both α and β genes are organized in the
germline genome and rearranged in T cells in a way remarkably similar to the
immunoglobulin genes (74-77). Thus, the organism inherits the genetic infor-
mation for these polypeptide chains as       and     gene segments or          and
    gene segments, and a random assembly of these gene segments occurs
exclusively during T cell development to generate a diversity comparable to
that of immunoglobulins for receptors expressed on the surface of mature T
cells. Even the presumed recognition sequences for the site specific recombin-
ase, the so called heptamers and nonamers with a 12 or 23 base pair spacer,
seem to be common for both the immunoglobulin and T cell receptor genes
 (Fig. 3).
   The complete primary structure of a T cell receptor can be deduced from the
nucleotide sequences of the α and β cDNA clones. Its comparison with the
primary structure of an immunoglobulin molecule suggests that the external
part of the receptor is composed of four compact, immunoglobulin-like globular
domains associated in two non-covalently bound pairs              and          and
further stabilized by an interchain disulfide bond between the C domain and
the transmembrane region. This extracellular part of the receptor is anchored
on the membrane lipid bilayer through two transmembrane peptides, one each
from the α and β chains (Fig. 6) (70).
   Determining the structure and organization of genes encoding the T cell
receptors settled the issue of their relationship with immunoglobulins and
accounted for the genetic origin of their diversity. However, these studies did
not illuminate the mechanism by which these receptors can accomplish the
dual recognition of an antigen and a MHC determinant. This last issue is
particularly tantalizing because recent studies using a technique for injecting T


398                                 Physiology or Medicine 1987




Figure 6. Diagram showing the subunit structures of T cell receptors α β (panel a) and γδ (panel b)
as deduced from the nucleotide sequences of cDNA clones. The αβ receptor is from an alloreactive
cytotoxic mouse T cell clone, 2C and the γδ receptor from a mouse thymocyte hybridoma, KN6,
prepared by Osami Kanagawa of Lilly Research Laboratories, La Jolla, California. Intra- and
inter-chain disulfide bonds are indicated. The receptors are thought to be anchored on the
membrane lipid bilayer by transmembrane peptides. The invariant CD3 complex associated with
the heterodimers are not shown.



cell receptor genes into cloned, functional T cells confirmed that the α β
heterodimer alone is sufficient to mediate this dual specificity (78). In order to
understand how the heterodimer simultaneously recognizes the two determi-
nants much more information is needed as to the structure of the receptor and
its compound ligand. It seems that the ultimate solution has to come from X-ray
crystallographic analysis of the receptor protein.

A new T cell receptor,
Since it was established that the third T cell-specific rearranging gene discov-
ered was for the α subunit, the second one became an orphan. This gene is so
closely related to the other two genes, however, that it seems certain that it
must have some role in recognition by T cells. Nevertheless, previous immuno-
chemical studies did not reveal any polypeptide chain that might be considered
as a candidate for the protein product of this gene. The γ gene is also assembled
somatically from I’, J, and C gene segments and shares a number of characteris-
tics with the a and β genes as well as with immunoglobulin genes (79,80).
   A number of possibilities were considered initially as firsthand roles for the
putative γ chain. For instance, it was thought that the γ chain may be a subunit
for a second T cell receptor coexpressed with the αβ heterodimer. This hypoth-


                         Somatic Generation of Immune Diversity                399



esis is in line with the two receptor model of dual recognition of antigen and
MHC by T cells. Another possibility proposed was that there may be a switch
in the subunits of the T cell receptor during T cell development. A model was
proposed in which a T cell receptor composed initially of a γδ heterodimer
switches to an αβ heterodimer as T cells differentiate in the thymus (81,82).
This model, which seemed to be supported by the time course kinetics of
appearance of α−, β−, and γ-specific RNA in developing hymocytes, was an
attempt to explain an apparent dilemma in the intrathymic selection of the T
cell repertoire (for instance see ref. 83).
    Subsequent studies carried out in my and several other laboratories, howev-
er, revealed a number of features of the y gene and its expression which are not
necessarily consistent with these hypotheses. First, the γ gene is not rearranged
in some T cell clones or hybridomas. Furthermore, even in many of those T
cells in which this gene is rearranged, the joining of the V and J gene segments
does not allow the J region codons to be translated in phase with the V region
codons (84-86). Thus, the γ gene product does not seem to be universally
expressed in conventional, αβ receptor-positive cytotoxic and helper T cells.
Second, the γ polypeptide chain is expressed on the surface of a small (less than
0.5%) subset of peripheral T cells as a component of a heterodimer referred to
as γδ (87-89). The majority of these T cells exhibit none of the CD4 or CD8
glycoproteins of conventional αβ receptor T cells on their surface, and therefore
 belong to a distinct cell population. Third, like the αβ heterodimer, the γ δ
 heterodimer is associated relatively tightly with another glycoprotein, CD3
 (87). The invariant CD3 protein complex contains a subunit that seems to play
a critical role in the transmission of the signal received by the variable hetero-
dimer into the cell (90). Thus, the similarly between the γδ− and ab-receptor
heterodimer includes both their structure and transmembrane signal transmis-
sion. Fourth, ψδ−bearing cells are relatively abundant in the CD4-, CD8 -
fraction of fetal and adult thymocytes (91-94). For instance, thymocytes of 16-
 day old fetal mice, which are mostly double negative cells (i.e. CD4 - and CDB-),
 are a relatively rich source of γδ-bearing cells. Since double negative
 thymocyte populations contain precursors for mature, functional,                  T
cells (95), a natural question that arises is whether γδ-bearing thymocytes are
precursors for αβ-bearing T cells. Fifth, another major site of expression of the
y&receptor is epidermal tissues. It was recently found by two groups that this
 tissue contains Thy-l + (another cell surface marker shared by all types of T
cells),                  a n d C D 8-cells bearing                 (96,97). Unlike
conventional T cells, these cells look more like dendritic cells and are therefore
referred to as dendritic epidermal cells (DEC). Finally, the δ gene also under-
goes rearrangement. D, J, and C gene segments for δ polypeptide chains have
 recently been mapped within the a gene family between                and       gene
 segments (98). The   nested  configuration  of α and δ gene segments  is intriguing
 and provokes curiosity about the possible relationship of gene organization
 with the regulation of the rearrangement and expression of the two types of
 genes. Another intriguing question is whether and to what extent the pool of
 and      gene segments overlap.


400                            Physiology or Medicine I987


   Despite the rapid progress made in the characterization of the y and δ genes
and their products, the most intriguing problem, namely the physiological role
of the γδ receptor-bearing cells is currently unknown. One can only speculate
on this matter using the currently available information. As to the ligand of this
new receptor, it is probably correct to emphasize the fact that the receptor
shares with the immunoglobulin B cell and the αβ T cell receptors the same
genetic basis for somatic diversification. It therefore is likely that the ligand in
question will also exhibit structural diversity. In this respect it is interesting
that recent studies by us and others suggest that at least part of the ligand is
encoded in MHC (99,100). The effector function of the cells bearing γ δ
receptors has not yet been defined with certainty, but recent studies using
human and mouse γδ cell clones suggest that many of these cells have cytotoxic
capacity (89,100,101). The finding of a new type of T cell with an apparently
distinct set of T cell receptors in epidermal tissues stimulates one’s imagina-
tion. It may be that occurrence of this type of T cell is not restricted to the outer
epithelial tissues but extends to all epithelial layers including the lining of
various internal organs (C. Janeway, pers. commun.). If so, these cells may
have evolved to protect the part of the body that is most vulnerable to infection,
namely its external and internal epithelial surface that are in direct contact
with the environment. However, the prominence of γδ cells in the thymus
suggests an intrathymic role of these cells as well. An exciting possibility that
has not been ruled out is a role for these cells in the intrathymic selection of
appropriate αβ T cells.


Concluding remarks
Use of restriction enzymes and recombinant DNA methods allowed resolution
of a long standing and central issue in immunology, the genetic origin of
antibody diversity. It turned out that an organism does not inherit even a single
complete gene for antibody polypeptide chains. Rather, the genetic information
is transmitted in germline as no more than several hundred gene segments.
Through a series of specialized somatic recombinations occuring specifically
during the differentiation of B lymphocytes, these gene segments are assembled
into tens of thousands of complete genes. Somatic hypermutation occurring in
 these assembled genes further diversifies antibody polypeptide chains, so that B
cells displaying immunoglobulin receptors having a better lit to a given antigen
can be selected in a later phase of B cell differentiation. Thus, in the immune
system, organisms have exploited two major processes for modification of
DNA, recombination and mutation, as means to diversify somatically the
limited amount of inherited genetic information in order to cope with the vastly
diverse antigen universe.
   Why has somatic diversification been necessary in the evolution of the
immune system? Microorganisms and substances produced by them are the
primary source of biologically relevent antigens against which vertebrates need
to produce antibodies for survival. Since the generation time of microorganisms
is several orders of magnitude shorter than that of vertebrates, the former can
produce genetic variants much faster than the latter. Thus, if genetic alterations


                          Somatic Generation of Immune Diversity                 401



in the germline genome were to be the only source of antibody diversity,
vertebrates would be unable to deal effectively with the rapidly changing world
of antigens. Somatic diversification allows the individual organism to generate
a virtually limitless number of lymphocyte variants. Like organisms in an
ecosystem, these lymphocytes are subject to selection by antigens and the fittest
will survive. Thus, as Jerne and Burnet were aware, the individual immune
system can be conceived of as a kind of Darwinian microcosm.
    The molecular biological approach played an even more fundamental role in
the analysis of the T cell receptor in that very little structural information
existed prior to the cloning of the receptor genes. It was demonstrated that the
polypeptide chains composing the receptor protein are encoded by genes that
share a common ancestor with the immunoglobulin genes. Like immunoglobu-
lins, T cell receptors are diversified by somatic recombination, but unlike
immunoglobulins, these receptor proteins have not been observed to undergo
further diversification by somatic mutation. The reason for this difference is
unknown, but it seems likely that the explanation will be as follows. First,
unlike immunoglobulins, T cell receptors function exclusively as cell surface
receptors which are specialized for interacting with cellbound antigens. Since
both ligand and receptor are distributed in two dimensional space when a T
cell interacts with an antigen-presenting cell, and as T cells have mechanisms
for transiently adhering to other cells, these receptor-ligand interactions occur
under conditions of high local concentration. Thus, improvement of the affinity
beyond the one accomplished by somatic rearrangement may not be necessary
in T cell recognition.
    Second, the ligand consists in part of an essentially invariant component, self
 MHC. As the T cell receptor is selected for self MHC recognition, both during
 development and during immunization, the extreme variability availabe via
 somatic mutation may not only be unnecessary but even disadvantageous.
Third, and probably more important, T cells appear to be selected early in
development for self tolerance, the inability to recognize self antigen. Somatic
 mutation during antigenic stimulation, as occurs in B lymphocytes, could lead
 to the development of autoreactivity. While autoreactive B cells depend upon
 the additional presence of autoreactive helper T cells to generate autoimmun-
 ity, this is not true of autoreactive T cells, which can directly produce disease.
Thus, Ehrlich’s famous concept of “honor autotoxins”, originally developed for
 antibodies, is probably critical only for T cells. It will be interesting to examine
 autoreactive T cell receptors for any evidence of post-thymic somatic diversifi-
cation.
    Finally, it is interesting to notice that during the fifteen years in which I have
 studied the immune system, the role of molecular genetics in immunological
 research has altered radically. When I started investigating the problem of
antibody diversity, there was abundant information about the structure and
function of antibody molecules, while virtually nothing was known about their
genes. By contrast, in the most recent study on T cell recognition no gene
product was known at all when the rearranging gene, γ was discovered. From
the structure of the gene and its rearranging behavior, it was deduced to be a


402                             Physiology or Medicine 1987


receptor gene, and this discovery has led directly to new insights into T cell
development and T cell biology. This short history of research in one area,
lymphocyte receptors, is yet another witness to the power of DNA technology,
and to the ability of this approach not only to explain known biological
phenomena, but also to contribute to the discovery of new biological systems.

Acknowledgement
The work summarized in this article is the result of collaboration with many
colleagues, students and technical assistants. I wish to extend my sincere
thanks to everyone of them. I also extend my thanks to Hoffman LaRoche
Company which so generously supported my work in Basel. My special thanks
are extended to Charles A. Janeway Jr., Nancy Hopkins and Yohtaroh Taka-
gaki for many useful comments on the manuscript, to Jiri Novotny for prepar-
ing Figure 4, and to my secretary, Eleanor Lahey Basel, for her tireless
devotion.




REFERENCES

  1. Porter, R.R., Science l80: 713-716 (1973).
  2. Edelman, G.M., Science l80: 830-840 (1973).
  3. Hilschmann, N. and Craig, L.C., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 53: 1 4 0 3 - 1 4 0 9
      (1965).
  4. Hood, I,., and Talmage D.W. Science 168: 325-334 (1970).
  5. Lederberg, J. Science 129: 1649-1653 (1959).
  6. Jerne, N.K. Eur. J. Immuno. 1: l-14 (1971).
  7. Cohn, M. Blomberg. B., Geckeler, W., Raschka, W., Riblet, R. and Weigert, M.
      in “The Immune System: Genes, Receptors, Signals” (E.E. Sercarz, A.R. Wil-
      liamson and C.F. Fox. eds, PP 89 Academic Press, New York and London (1974).
  8. Gelderman, A.H., Rake, A.V., and Britten, R.J. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
      68: 172-176 (1971).
  9. Bishop, J.O. Biochem. J. 126: 171-185 (1971).
 10. Tonegawa, S., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 73: 203-207, (1976).
 11. Weigert, M., Cesari, M., Yonkovich, S.J. and Cohn, M. Nature 228: 1045-1047 (1970).
      (1970).
 12. Campbell, A.,Advan. Genet. 11: 101 (1962).
 13. Dryer, W.J., and Bennett, J., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 54, 864-869 (1965).
 14. Danna,J.J., Sack Jr.. G.H., and Nathans, D. J. Mol. Biol. 78: 363 (1973).
 15. Southern, E., J, Mol. Biol. 98: 503 (1975).
 16. Hozumi, N., and Tonegawa, S., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., USA, 73: 3628-3632,
      (1976).
 17. Thomas, M., White, R.L. and Davis, R.N. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 73: 2294-
      2298 (1976).
 18. Tonegawa. S.. Brack, C., Hozumi, N. and Schuller, R., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
      USA. 74: 3518-3522 (1977).
 19. Tonegawa, S.. Maxam. A.M. Tizard, R., Bernard, O., and Gilbert. W., Proc.
      Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 75: 1485-1489 (1978).
 20. Brack, C. Hirama. M . Lenhard-Schuller, R., and Tonegawa, S. Cell, 15: l-14
      (1978).
 21. Lenhard-Schuller, R.. Hohn. B.. Brack, C., Hirama, XI., and Tonegawa, S., Proc.
      Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 75: 4709-4713, (1978).


                         Somatic Generation of Immune Diversity                  403



22. Brack, C. and Tonegawa, S., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 74: 5652-5656, (1977).
23. Bernard, O., Hozumi, N., and Tonegawa, S., Cell, 15: 1133-1144 (1978).
24. Weigert, M., Gatmaitan, L., Loh, E., Schilling, J., and Hood, L., Nature 2 7 6 ,
    785-789 (1978).
25. Kabat, E.A., WU, T.T.. Bilofsky, H., Reid-Miller, M., and Perry. H., U.S. Dept.
    of Health and Human Services Publication (1983).
26. Seidman, J.G., Leder, A., Nau, M., Norman, B., and Leder, P., Science 202: 11-16
    (1978).
27. Cory, S., Tyler, B.M., Adams, J.M. J. Mol. Appl. Genet. 1: 103-116 (1981).
28. Davis, M., Calame, K., Early, P., l.ivant, D., Joho, R.. Weisman, L, and Hood, L.
    Nature 283: 733-738 (1980).
29. Maki, Richard; Traunecker, André; Sakano, Hiroshi; Roeder, William; and Tone-
    gawa, S., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 77: 2138-2142 (1980).
30. Early, P., Huang, H., Davis, M., Calame. K., and Hood, L., Cell 19: 981-092
    (1980).
31. Sakano, H., Rlaki, R., Kurasawa, Y., Roeder, W., and Tonegawa. S., Nature
    286: 676-683 (1980).
32. Sakano. H., Kurosawa, Y., Weigert. M., and Tonegawa, S., Nature. 290: 562-565
    (1981).
33. Kurosawa, Y., von Boehmer, H., Haas, W., Sakano, H., Traunecker, A., and
    Tonegawa, S., Nature 290: 565-570 (1981).
34. Kurosawa, Y., and Tonegawa, S.,J. Exp. Med. 155: 201-218 (1982).
35. Wood, C., and Tonegawa, S., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 80: 3030-3034 (1983).
36. Sakano, H., Huppi, K., Heinrich. G., and Tonegawa, S., Nature 280, 288-294
    (1979).
37. Max. E.E., Seidman, J.G., and Leder, P., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 76: 3450-
    3454 ( t 979).
38. Halligan, B.D., and Desiderio, S.V. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 84: 7019-7023
     (1987).
39. Aguitera, R.J., Akira, S., Okagaki, K. and Sakano, H. Cell (in press)
40. Alt, F., and Baltimore, D., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 79: 4118-4I22 (1982).
41. Azuma, T., lgras, V., Reilly, E., and Eisen, H.N.. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
    81: 6139-6143 (1984).
42. Burnet, F.M. The Clonal Selection Theory of Acquired Immunity. London:
     Cambridge Univ. (1959).
43. Bothwell. A.L.M., Paskind, M., Reth, M., lmanishi-Kari. T., Rawesky, K., and
     Baltimore, D., Cell 24: 624 (1981).
44. Crews, S, Griffin, J., Huang, H., Calame, K., and Hood, L.. Cell 25: 5 9 - 6 6
     (1981).
45. Givol, D., Zakut, R., Effron, K.. Rechavi, G., Ram, D., and Cohen, J.B., Nature
  292: 4 2 6 - 4 3 0 ( 1 9 8 1 ) .
46. Selsing, E., and Storb, U., Nucl. Acids Res. 9: 5725-5735 (1981).
47. Gearhart, P.J., Johnson, N.D., Douglas, R., and Hood, L. Nature 291: 29-33
     (3981).
48. Kim, S., Davis, M., Sinn, E., Patten, P., and Hood, I.., Cell 27: 573-580 (1981).
49, Askonas, B.A. and Williamson, A.R. Eur. J. lmmunol. 2: 487-493 (1972).
50. Berek, C., Griffiths, G.M., and Milstein, C. Nature 316: 412-418 (1985).
51. McKean, D., Hüppi, K., Bell, M., Standt: I,., Gerhard, W., and Weigert, M. Proc.
     Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 81: 3180-3184 (1984).
52. Okumura, K., Julius, M.H., Tsu, T., Herzenberg, L.A., and Herzenberg, L.A.
     Eur. J, lmmunol. 6: 467-472 (1976).
53. Sablitzberg, M., Kocks, C., and Rajewsky, K. EMBOJ. 4: 345-350 (1985).
54. Sickevitz, M., Kocks, C., Rajewsky, K., and Dildrop, K. Cell 48: 757-770 (1987).
53. Wysocki, L.J.. Manser, T., and Gefter, M.L. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 83: 1847-
     1851 (1986).


404                             Physiology or Medicine 1987


56. Maki, R., Kearney, J., Paige, C., and Tonegawa, S., Science, 209: 1366-1369
    (1980).
57. Perry, R.P., Kelley, D.E., Coleclough, C., and Kearney, J.F., Proc. Natl. Acad.
    Sci. USA 78: 247-251 (1981).
58. Reth, M.G., Ammirati, P.A., Jackson, S.J., and Alt. F.W., Nature 317: 353-354
    (1985).
59. Eisen, H.N. and Siskind, G.W., Biochemistry 3: 996-1000 (1964).
60. Rosentha1, A.S. and Shevach, E.M., J. Exp. Med. 138: 1194-1212 (1973).
61, Katz, D.H., Hamaoka, T., Dorf, M.E., and Benacerraf, B. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
    USA 70: 2624-2628 (1973).
62. Zinkernagel, R.M. and Doherty, P.C. J. Exp. Med. 141: 1427-1436 (1975).
63. Allison, J.P., McIntyre, B.W., and Bloch, D., J. I mmunol. 129: 2293-2300 (1982).
64. Meuer, S.C., Acuto, O., Hussey, R.E., Hodgdon, J.C., Fitzgerald, K.A., Schloss-
    man, S.F., and Reinherz, E.L. Nature 303: 808-810 (1983).
65. Haskins, K., Kubo, R., White, J., Pigeon, M., Kappler, J., and Marrack, P., J,
    Exp. Med. 157: 1149-1169 (1983).
66. Hedrick, S.M., Cohen, D.I., Nielsen, EA., and Davis, M.M., Nature 308: 149-153
    (1984).
67. Hedrick, S.M., Nielsen, E.A., Kavaler, J., Cohen, D.I., and Davis, M.M., Nature
    308: 153-158 (1984).
68. Yanagi, Y., Yoshikai, Y., Leggett, K., Clark, S.P., Aleksander, I., and Mak. T.W.,
    Nature 308: 145-149 (1984).
69. Acuto, O., Fabbi, M., Smart, J., Poole, C., Protentis, J., Royer, H.D., Schlossman,
    S., and Reinherz, E.L., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 81: 3851-3855 (1984).
70. Saito, H., Kranz, D.M., Takagaki, Y., Hayday, A.C., Eisen, H.N. and Tonegawa,
    S., Nature 309: 757-762 (1984).
71. Saito, H., Kranz, D.M., Takagaki, Y., Hayday, A.C., Eisen, H., and Tonegawa,
    S., Nature 312: 36-39 (1984).
72. Hannum, T.H., Kappler, J.W., Trowbridge, I.S., Mat-rack, P., and Freed, J.H.,
    Nature 312: 65-67 (1984).
73. Chien, Y-h., Becker, D.M., Lindsten, T., Okamura. M., Cohen, D.J., and Davis,
    M.M., Nature 312: 31-35 (1984).
74. Chien, Y-h, Gascoigne, N., Kavaler, J., Lee, N.E., and Davis, M.M., Nature
    309: 322-326 (1984).
75. Siu, G., Kronenberg, M., Strauss, E., Haars, R., Mak, T.W., and Hood, L.,
    Nature 311: 344-350 (1984).
76. Hayday, A.C., Diamond, D.J., Tanigawa, G., Heilig, J.S., Folsom, V., Saito, H.,
    Tonegawa, S., Nature 316: 828-832 (1985).
77. Winoto, A., Mjolsness, S., and Hood, L., Nature 316: 832-836 (1985).
78.           Z., Haas, W., Weiss, S., McCubray, J., Kiefer, H., von Boehmer, H., and
    Steinmetz, M. Nature 320: 232-238 (1986).
79. Kranz, D.M., Saito, H., Heller, M., Takagaki, Y., Haas, W., Eisen, H.N., and
    Tonegawa, S., Nature 313: 752-755 (1985).
80. Hayday, A.C., Saito, H., Gillies, S.D., Kranz, D.M., Tanigawa, G., Eisen, H.N.,
    Tonegawa, S., Cell 40: 259-269 (1985).
81. Raulet, D.H., Garman, R.D., Saito, H. and Tonegawa, S., Nature 314: 103-107
     (1985).
82. Pernis, B. and Axel, R., Cell 41: 13-16 (1985).
83. Schwartz R. in Fundamental Immunology (ed.) William Paul, Raven Press, NY
     (1984) pp. 379-438.
84. Reilly, E.B., Kranz, D.M., Tonegawa, S., and Eisen, H.N., Nature 321: 878-880
     (1986).
85. Rupp, F., Frech, G., Hengartner, H., Zinkernagel, R.M. and Joho, R., Nature
    321: 876-878 (1986).
86. Heilig, J.S. and Tonegawa, S. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 84: 8070-8074 (1987).


                          Somatic Generation of Immune Diversity                   405



 87. Brenner, M.B., McLean, J., Dialynas, D.P., Strominger, J.L., Smith, J.A., Owen,
     F.L., Seidman, J.G., Ip, S., Rosen, F. and Krangel, M.S. Nature 322: 145-149
     (1986).
 88. Lanier, L.L., Federspiel, N.A., Ruitenberg, J.J., Phillips, J.H., Allison, J.P.,
     Littman, D., and Weiss, A. J. Exp. Med. 165: 1076-1094 (1987).
 89. Borst, J., Van de Griend, R.J., van Oostveen, J.W., Ang, S-L., Melief, C.J.,
     Seidman, J.G., Bolhuis, R.L.H., Nature 325: 683-688 (1987).
 90. Wauve, J.P. van, Mey, J.R. de, and Goosens, J.G. J. Immunol. 124: 2708-2812
      (1980).
 91. Bank, I., DePinho, R.A., Brenner, M.B., Cassimeris, J., Alt, F.W., and Chess, L.
     Nature 322: 179-81 (1986).
 92. Lew: A.M., Pardoll, D.M., Maloy, W.L., Fowlkes, B.J., Kruisbeck, A., Cheng,
     S-F, Germain, R.N., Bluestone, J.A., Schwartz, R.H., and Coligen, J.E. Science
     234: 1401-1405 (1986)
 93. Nakanishi, N., Maeda, K., Ito, K., Heller, M., and Tonegawa, S., Nature
     325: 720-723 (1987).
 94. Pardoll, D.M., Fowlkes, B.J., Bluestone, J.A., Kruisbeck, A., Maloy, W.L., Coli-
     gan, J.E. and Schwartz, R.H. Nature 326: 79-81 (1987).
 95. Fowlkes, B.J., Thesis, George Washington University Graduate School of Arts and
     Sciences, Washington DC (1984).
 96. Koning, F., Stingl, G., Yokoyama, W.M., Maloy, W.L., Tschachler, E., Shevach,         __
     E.M., Coligan, J.E. Science 236: 834-837 (1987).
 97. Kuziel, W.A., Takashima, A., Bonyhadi, M., Bergstresser, P.R., Allison, J.P.,
     Tigelaar, R.E., and Tucker, P.W. Nature 328: 263-266 (1987).
 98. Chien, Y-h., Iwashima, M., Kaplan, K.B., Elliott, J.F. and Davis, M.M. Nature
     327: 677-682 (1987).
 99. Maeda, K., Nakanishi, N., Rogers, B.L., Haser, W.G., Shitara, K., Yoshida, H.,
     Takagaki, Y., Augustin, A.A. and Tonegawa, S. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
     84: 6536-6540 (1987).
100. Matis, L.A., Cron, R., and Bluestone, J.A. Nature 330: 262-264 (1987).
101. Moingeon, P., Jitsukawa, S., F aure, F., Troalen, F., Triebel, F., Graziani, M.,
      Forestier, F., Bellet, D., Bohuon, C., and Hercend, T. Nature 325: 723-726 (1987).
102. Gillies, S.D., Morrison, S.L., Oi, V.T., and Tonegawa, S., Cell 33: 7 1 7 - 7 2 8
      (1983).
103. Banerji, J., Olson, L., and Schaffner, W., Cell 33: 729-739 (1983).
104. Satow, Y., Cohen, G.H., Padlan, E.A., Davies, D.R. Mol. Biol. 190: 5 9 3 - 6 0 4
      (1986).
105. Novotny, J., Bruccoleri, R.E., Newell, J., Murphy, D., Haber, E., Karplus, M. J.
      Biol. Chem. 258: 14433-14437 (1983).
106. Amit, A.G., Mariuzza, R.A., Phillips, S.E.V., Poljak, R. Science 233: 747-752
      (1986).
107. Sheriff, S., Silverton, E.W., Padlan, E.A., Cohen, G.H., Smith-Gill, S.J., Finzel,
      B.C., Davies, D.R. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 84: 8075-8079
