NATURE’S GIFT TO SCIENCE
Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2002
by
SYDNEY BRENNER
Salk Institute, 100010 N. Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, California, USA,
and King’s College, Cambridge, England.




The title of my lecture is “Nature’s gift to Science.” It is not a lecture about
one scientific journal paying respects to another, but about how the great di-
versity of the living world can both inspire and serve innovation in biological
research. Current ideas of the uses of Model Organisms spring from the ex-
emplars of the past and choosing the right organism for one’s research is as
important as finding the right problems to work on. In all of my research
these two decisions have been closely intertwined. Without doubt the fourth
winner of the Nobel prize this year is Caenohabditis elegans; it deserves all of
the honour but, of course, it will not be able to share the monetary award.
    I intend to tell you a little about the early work on the nematode to put it
into an intellectual perspective. It bridges, both in time and concept, the biol-
ogy we practice today and the biology that was initiated some fifty years ago
with the revolutionary discovery of the double-helical structure of DNA by
Watson and Crick. My colleagues who follow will tell you more about the
worm and also recount their incisive research on the cell lineage and on the
genetic control of all death.
    To begin with, I can do no better than to quote from the paper I published
in 1974 (1). The paper was unhesitatingly entitled: “The genetics of Caenor-
habditis elegans” and the opening sentence reads: “How genes might specify
the complex structures found in higher organisms is a major unsolved prob-
lem of biology.” This is still true today. The paper outlined how a genetic ap-
proach coupled with detailed studies at the cellular level might be a way of
studying this important question. It introduced C. elegans as the organism of
choice for this work.
    This choice had a long history. Twenty years earlier, we had posed a differ-
ent question. Then, the central problem in biology was how the one-dimen-
sional sequence of nucleotides in DNA specified the one-dimensional se-
quence of amino acids in proteins. Today, any student would give this
question a very simple answer. ‘All you have to do is to find a gene and have
it sequenced and then make some protein using the gene and get someone to
determine its amino acid sequence.’ In those early days, the techniques for
determining amino acid sequences of proteins were primitive and needed
large amounts of proteins which had to be purified first. There were no

274


methods to isolate genes and no techniques for the chemical determination
of their sequences. Our analysis of genes was limited to genetics. Indeed, the
only way we could assert that there was a gene in an organism was by finding
a mutant allele for it. Like Mendel, we could not say that there was a gene for
the character of tallness until dwarf mutants were discovered suffering from a
heritable lack of tallness. Genetic analysis of linkage used recombination to
analyse the structure of chromosomes, to determine the locations of genes
and their linear order along a chromosome. But in order to probe the struc-
ture of the gene something special was needed. That was provided by bacte-
riophages, viruses with tiny genomes which grew on bacteria and which
showed recombination. In 1954, Seymour Benzer developed a system using
the rII gene of bacteriophage T4, in which powerful selection could be ex-
erted for the r+ phenotype. Forward mutants could be easily picked and large
numbers of phage crosses could be readily performed. The selection method
allowed recombinants to be measured at very high resolution, limited only by
the rates of reverse mutations. These experiments revealed that the gene con-
tained hundreds of sites at which mutation could occur and that the scale of
separation was of the order of the distances between adjacent base pairs on
the DNA structure. The experiments not only exploded the classical idea of
the gene as an indivisible unit of function, mutation and recombination, but
the fine structure map could now be viewed as a picture of the nucleotide se-
quence of the DNA. It therefore provided an approach to studying how the
sequence of bases in DNA might correspond to the sequence of amino acids
in proteins by using genetics for the first and chemistry for the latter. This
programme of molecular genetics was never quite completed, but the ex-
ploitation of the properties of T4 bacteriophages played important roles in
studies of mutagenesis, the general nature of the genetic code and genetic
suppression, and in the demonstration of the existence of messenger RNA.
   For our purposes today we need to reflect on the properties that made
phages that ideal ‘model organisms’ for this phase of research in molecular
biology. They were easy to grow and maintain in a laboratory, large numbers
could be readily generated, and many experiments could be conducted in
parallel. The final readout was the presence or absence of lysis of bacteria and
this assay could be applied to single particles each of which left a plaque – an
area of lysis in a lawn of bacteria. For mapping purposes, scoring was digital –
yes or no – and single particles could be easily counted to obtain accurate fre-
quencies.
   After the basic principles of information transfer from genes to proteins
had been established with the identification of messenger RNA, the discovery
of the mechanism of protein synthesis and the structure of genetic code, it
was natural for some of us to ask whether the lessons learnt in molecular biol-
ogy could be applied to the genetics of more complex phenotypes. All ques-
tions in genetics involve asking how the phenotype is represented in the
genotype or, reflexively, how the genes map onto the phenotype. It was clear
that one could not have understood how metabolism or biosynthesis was rep-
resented on the genome until one had conceived of the ‘one gene-one en-

                                                                            275


zyme relationship’, that a gene specified the amino acid sequence of a
polypeptide chain, which after folding correctly, was able to perform a spe-
cific catalytic function in a metabolic pathway. In the same way, the elaborate
structure of the protein coat of a bacteriophage could not be understood
without knowing that it was built of many different kinds of subunits and that
these were able to self-assembly into the final particle. We have to know how
the gene specifies the construction of the entity which carries out the func-
tion. The same is true at a higher level of organization. In studying the ge-
netics of behaviour, it is difficult, if not impossible, to go directly from the
gene to behaviour, because there is no simple mapping that connects the two.
In my paper, I put it in this way: “Behaviour is the result of a complex ill-un-
derstood set of computations performed by nervous systems and it seems es-
sential to decompose the question into two: one concerned with the question
of the genetic specification of nervous systems and the other with the way ner-
vous systems work to produce behaviour.” Thus, just as the structure and
function of protein molecules is the necessary connection between the genes
and metabolism, the link between genes and behaviour resides in under-
standing the structure of nervous systems and how they are constructed.
These are questions of anatomy and embryological development. This set the
requirements for the experimental organism as one which was not only suit-
able for genetical study in the laboratory but also allowed the structure of the
nervous system to be accurately defined. Since a nervous system is essentially
a cellular network, we had to be able to observe junctions between cells and
their processes and this could only be achieved with the electron microscope
which has the necessary resolution. Since the electron microscope provides
only a small window because of its high magnification, we needed a small ani-
mal which would also need to have a nervous system with a small number of
cells. After some searching, my choice finally settled on the small nematode,
Caenorhabditis elegans. This was a self-fertilizing hermaphrodite with rare spon-
taneous males. The adults are about 1 mm in length and the life cycle is com-
pleted in 3 1/2 days. The animals live in a two-dimensional world feeding on
E. coli on the surface of agar plates. They are easy to grow in bulk, each ani-
mal producing about 300 progeny during a cycle. My paper reported the iso-
lation of several hundred mutants together their complementation and map-
ping to define about one hundred loci. In parallel with the genetic work, I
launched a program with Nichol Thompson to determine the complete struc-
ture of the worm by serial section electron microscopy (2). This project was
completed by John White and Eileen Southgate who joined the group soon af-
ter it started and whose work resulted in the determination of the complete
structure of the nervous system (and much more besides) in C.elegans (3).
   The paper I referred to summarized the work on genetics but, in the early
seventies, trying to understand the functions of genes specifying the develop-
ment of the nervous system in molecular terms seemed impossibly remote.
However, going to the molecular level was inevitable, and we very early initi-
ated studies of mutants which affected the movement of the worm by
disrupting muscle structure function (4,5,6). The defects were easily charac-

276


terized by electron microscopy and we began to work on two of the genes,
unc -15 and unc -54, which had abnormal thick filaments in the body muscles.
We chose muscle because the structural proteins constitute a considerable
fraction of the total protein of the worm and could be easily isolated and
characterized by biochemical analysis. Nonetheless, this seemed a rather lim-
ited and oblique way to tackle a very large problem.
   Our work and indeed the whole field was revolutionized by the discovery of
DNA cloning and by the invention by Sanger and Gilbert a little while later of
methods for sequencing DNA. It seemed possible that we could obtain the
whole genome as a collection of DNA fragments and then proceed to char-
acterize the genes directly by chemical means. At the Asilomar Conference, in
1975, I gave a talk on our work on C.elegans and on the promise of applying
the new methods for obtaining insights into the molecular basis of gene ac-
tion in complex organisms. We had already characterised the DNA comple-
ment of C.elegans and, in a paper (7) accompanying the genetics paper, J.
Sulston and I showed that the genome consisted largely of unique DNA se-
quences and contained 20 times the amount of DNA in Escherchia coli. This es-
timated the haploid amount of DNA as 80 megabases, which was an underes-
timate partly because the value taken for E.coli was too low. We began to work
in earnest to try to clone the genes we had assigned to components of thick
filaments, the heavy chain of myosin and paramyosin. This was accomplished
by Jonathan Karn and Alexander MacCleod (8), who used a myosin mutation
previously shown to be a small internal deletion of the protein (9) to validate
that the correct gene had been cloned. The great power of the new genetic
approach was revealed by subsequent work of Jonathan Karn. Very quickly
three other loci were identified for myosin heavy chains, and all were se-
quenced. It became clear that the best way to obtain the amino acid sequence
of a protein was to sequence the gene specifying it; indeed, for the heavy
chain of myosin the work involved had been reduced about a thousand fold.
   The cloning of genes involved in the development of C.elegans and the
identification of their proteins led quickly to insights into the molecular basis
of the defects in the mutants that had been isolated. The irony was that, while
C.elegans had been proposed as a model organism to understand genetical
specification in the more complex mammalian organisms, by the time we
were able analyze our mutant genes, a few thousand genes had been cloned
from humans, rats and mice, and these were frquently the sequences that pro-
vided instant identification of many C.elegans genes. These early studies led
John Sulston and others to mapping the genome of C.elegans into ordered
clones, and this was followed by obtaining first a draft sequence and, more re-
cently, the complete sequence of the genome of the worm. At the same time
John Sulston, as you will hear later, was able to derive the complete lineage of
the cells in the hermaphrodite and the male. Thus there had became avail-
able a model organism in which we knew the positions of every cell in the
body and how they were connected to each other, the complete cell lineage
which told us where every cell came from in development, and the total DNA
sequence together with a host of methods to alter the DNA and its expres-

                                                                             277


sion. An almost a similar path has been followed by those working on
Drosophila, but the fly is much more complex than the worm and the anatomy
of its nervous system has not reached the level of completeness achieved for
C.elegans. The complete genome sequence of the fly is now also available and
both the fly and the worm will continue to be important models for the study
of function in complex organisms.
   The new techniques of cloning and sequencing, which greatly enlarged the
scope of genetical analysis in the nematode, led to the question of whether
they could be extended to other organisms in which standard genetical analy-
sis was difficult or even impossible. The new technology had liberated genet-
ics from the tyranny of the reproductive cycles of organisms and, in principle,
could be now applied to any organism: Its power stems from the properties of
DNA which enable its isolation, amplification and expression in simple mi-
crobes, and from the uniqueness of DNA sequencing, a technology that al-
lows us to extract the essential information – the linear sequence of nu-
cleotides – in DNA from any source, viruses, microbes, plants and animals, as
well as from molecules that can be copied into DNA.
   In 1985, when the first suggestions were made to sequence the human
genome, I thought that the sequencing techniques, even with incremental
improvements, would not be equal to the task, and would require a factory
scale operation to do it. I had also come to the conclusion that most of the
human genome was junk, a form of rubbish which, unlike garbage, is not
thrown away. My view at the time was that we should treat the human genome
like income tax and find every legitimate way of avoiding sequencing it. It
could therefore be asked whether a genome existed in Nature which perhaps
had very much less junk but nevertheless had the full repertoire of vertebrate
genes? It is easy to ask the question if one already has the answer. Towards the
end of the 1960’s I spent time in Woods Hole and took advantage of the li-
brary where I first discovered the papers of Hinegardner (10). At the time, I
was puzzled by the enormous variations in the amounts of DNA in different
organisms. Indeed, whereas most physicists thought that organisms did not
have enough DNA to specify their complexity, it was clear to me that many or-
ganisms had too much. I discovered from Hinegardner that one group of
fish, the Tetraodontidae, which included the Japanese pufferfish, Fugu, had
very small genomes, with a haploid content of about 400 megabases as op-
posed to the 3000 megabases of mammalian genomes. Although teleost fish
are distant from humans they are still vertebrates, with the same body plans,
development and physiological systems as ourselves. Because of these basic
similarities it seemed unlikely that Fugu, with a haploid DNA content one-
eighth that of mammals would have eight times fewer genes, making it much
more probable that what was missing in Fugu was junk DNA. If Fugu had the
same gene repertoire as humans, then its genome would be more compact
giving us the human gene inventory for eight times less work and expense.
We proved that this was indeed the case and proposed the genome of Fugu as
the ideal model vertebrate genome (11), with a DNA content only 4 times
that of C.elegans. I failed to persuade any of the official genome organizations

278


of the virtues of such a model genome and it remained a personal project un-
til quite recently when, with the collaboration of the US Department of
Energy and the generous support of the Agency for Science, Technology and
Research of Singapore, we were able to produce a first draft sequence which
vindicated everything we had been saying for the past decade (12). This pro-
ject also reunited several members of the group who helped me start this
work in Cambridge: S. Aparicio, G. Elgar and B. Venkatesh. Sam Aparicio,
originally (13), and B. Venkatesh and I (14,15,16) have used the Fugu
genome in an interesting application of the new genetics to discover the
structure of control sequences in mammalian genomes, asking whether the
mouse is able to read the Fugu genome in the same way as it reads its own, by
seeing whether there are sequences in Fugu which control expression with
the same cell specificity as those in the mouse. So far apart are these genomes
on the evolutionary scale that time has randomised all irrelevant sequences to
reveal only those with conserved function unobscured by remanants of com-
mon origin. In fact, these experiments are tantamount to crossing a mouse
with a fish, exploiting the power of modern DNA technology to penetrate
natural reproductive barriers and extending the power of functional geneti-
cal analysis. Fugu is not a model organism but is rather an organism that pos-
sesses a model genome. The mouse is the model organism in this case, but,
unlike forty years ago, when I began to work on C.elegans, we now do not re-
quire a single model on which everything – genetics, physiology and bio-
chemistry – can be done. Today we can take the genome from one source,
and cells from another, and we can create unique biological material by mov-
ing genes from one organism to another.
   What of the future? I want to discuss two ideas briefly about future research
which I think will become the challenge for the future. If we take 2020 as the
year of good vision, we may note that this is seventeen years in the future and
it represents about the same time today from 1985 when the first discussions
began about sequencing the human genome. It would not be excessively out-
rageous to suggest that the projects begun today could be completed by 2020
especially if we continued to work as a community of scientists.
   The first of these projects I call CellMap. We are all conscious today that we
are drowning in a sea of data and starving for knowledge. The biological sci-
ences have exploded, largely through our unprecedented power to accumu-
late descriptive facts. How to understanding genomes and how to use them is
going to be a central task of our research for the future. We need to turn da-
ta into knowledge and we need a framework to do it. So genocentric has mod-
ern biology become that we have forgotten that the real units of function and
structure in an organism are cells and not genes. The genome has gives us
the inventory of gene loci and we must now get on to the discovery of the ac-
tions of their products and how these are integrated in the physiology of cells.
First, we will need to define all of the non-contingent states of gene expres-
sion in an organism, which is proposed as the correct way of defining a cell
type. How many different cell types do we possess? There may be 200 in the
body but there are likely to be many more in the brain. On top of this are all

                                                                             279


the contingent states; cells respond to outside stimuli and change their pat-
terns of gene expression, but I do not consider a naïve neuron as a different
cell type from its near identical neighbor which may have learnt something,
although clearly the capacity to learn is a non-contingent property of that cell
type. The next task will be to see how the gene loci map onto these cell types,
to solve what may be called the instantiation problem. Many gene loci have
multiple instantiations distinguished by different promoters which specify the
cell type for expression, or by additions or deletions of coding sequences by
differential splicing which determine the location in the cell where that in-
stantiation may act. There may be other differentially spliced sequence dif-
ferences that control the lifetime of the messenger RNA or of the protein
product. Not only is the cell the only physical locus for gene action but it is
the correct level of abstraction to construct a framework for understanding
functions. CellMap is seen as a map in many dimensions; it is at once a map of
the cells in the organism onto which are projected the map of instantiations,
as well as a map of the molecules in the cell. It is also a temporal map con-
necting cells with their predecessors and successors in development. By study-
ing how such cells are connected with their homologues in different organ-
isms we can see how these maps are layered in evolutionary space and what
has been added to or removed from any particular subsystem as we move up
and down on the evolutionary scale. The architecture of CellMap will be
couched in a form that would facilitate computation, so that we can develop
it into a predictive system, and, in the future, a system which we could use for
the synthesis of new cell types and new organisms.
    My second gedanken project is called Humanity’s Genes. It arose in my
mind during a discussion of a proposal to take the inbred lines of mice, and
extensively intercross them to generate 30,000 different mice representing
different mosaics of the initial gene pools. Specially trained mouse pheno-
typers would then analyse the physiological properties in these mice and cor-
relate them with their individual genomes. Unfortunately, the latter is the dif-
ficult task, as today there is no reasonable technology that can achieve this in
any depth. However, suppose technology existed which made it easy to char-
acterise 30,000 genomes, perhaps even to the point of resequencing them,
would we bother to do this work with mice? We could go directly to humans,
where we already have large numbers of diverse genomes, with skilled and ex-
pensively trained phenotypers, called doctors, studying them. Thus, since the
technology does not exist, it now needs to be invented to provide the means
of accurately analyzing large populations of genomes for detailed studies of
natural human genetic variation and its correlation with phenotypes of
health and disease. I believe that this will be the major challenge in human
biology and medicine in the next decade. I am convinced that we will make
our significant discoveries in humans and that the mouse will be used to vali-
date the human findings by genetic synthesis, much in the same way as the
chemist confirms a structure analysis by chemical synthesis. Chakravarti has
shown the way forward by his synthesis of Hirschsprung’s disease in mice
(17).

280


   CellMap and Humanity’s Genes are not really separate projects. We need
the first to tell us where to look initially in genomes and to interpret what we
may discover in the studies of human genetic variation. What will be the sig-
nificant differences that we may find? Will they be amino acid changes in
polypeptides, or changes in control sequences that affect the timing and
amount of the products expressed, or in RNA molecules whose functions we
are only now beginning to glimpse ? We may also come to understand the
enormous changes in structure and function that were brought about by evo-
lution and gave our brains the immense capacities that they possess.
   Nature has been generous to Science and has provided us with many mod-
el systems. I have mentioned only the few that have been important in my
own scientific work. C.elegans will continue to yield fruitful discoveries and in-
sights in spite of my argument that we do not need model systems any longer
for the study of human biology. However, there are many aspects of humani-
ty that we still need to understand for which there are no useful models.
Perhaps we should pretend that morality is known only to the gods and that if
we treat humans as model organisms for the gods, then in studying ourselves
we may come to understand the gods as well.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I need to acknowledge the great debt I owe to the large number of scientists
who joined me in converting Caenorhabditis elegans from what was once re-
garded as a joke organism into the powerful experimental system it has be-
come today. The recognition given to our work by the award of the Nobel
Prize owes much to their labours. I want particularly to record the patient and
generous support given to me by the Medical Research Council of Great
Britain who allowed me to initiate and develop the research on C. elegans in
the MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology in Cambridge. Such longterm re-
search could not be done today, when everybody is intent only on assured
short term results and nobody is willing to gamble. Innovation comes only
from the assault on the unknown.
   My research on Fugu was initiated with funding by the Prize awarded to me
by the Fondation Louis Jeantet de Médecine of Switzerland, and by generous
grants from E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Company, Wilmington USA. It has al-
so enjoyed continued support from the Institute of Molecular & Cell Biology
and the Agency for Science, Technology and Research in Singapore. Some of
the research was also carried out in The Molecular Sciences Institute,
Berkeley.


REFERENCES
 1. Brenner, S. The genetics of Caenorhabditis elegans. Genetics 77, 71–94, 1974.
 2. Ward, S., Thomson, J.N., White, J.G. and Brenner, S. Electron microscopical recon-
    struction of the anterior sensory anatomy of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans.
    J.Comp.Neurology 160, 313–338, 1975.

                                                                                 281


 3. White, J.G., Southgate, E., Thomson J.N. and Brenner, S. The structure of the nervous
    system of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Phil.Trans.Roy.Soc.Lond.B. 314, 1–340,
    1986.
 4. Epstein, H.F., Waterston, R.H. and Brenner, S. A mutant affecting the heavy chain of
    myosin in Caenorhabditis elegans. J.Mol.Biol. 90, 291–300, 1974.
 5. Waterston, R.H., Epstein, H.F. and Brenner, S. Paramyosin of Caenorhabditis elegans.
    J.Mol.Biol. 90, 285–290, 1974.
 6. MacLeod, A.R., Waterston, R.H., Fishpool, R.M. and Brenner, S. Identification of the
    structural gene for a myosin heavy-chain in Caenorhabditis elegans. J.Mol.Biol. 114,
    133–140, 1977.
 7. Sulston, J.E. and Brenner, S. The DNA of Caenorhabditis elegans. Genetics 77, 95–104,
    1974.
 8. MacLeod, A.R., Karn, J. and Brenner, S. Molecular analysis of the unc-54 myosin
    heavy-chain gene of Caenorhabditis elegans. Nature 291, 386–390, 1981.
 9. MacLeod, A.R., Waterston, R.H. and Brenner, S. An internal deletion mutant of a
    myosin heavy chain in Caenorhabditis elegans. Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.USA 74, 5336–5340,
    1977.
10. Hinegardner, R. Evolution of cellular DNA content in teleost fishes. Am.Nat. 102,
    517–523, 1968.
11. Brenner, S. G. Elgar, R. Sandford, A. MacRae, B. Venkatesh and S. Aparicio.
    Characterization of the pufferfish (Fugu) Genome as a compact model vertebrate
    genome. Nature 366, 265–267, 1993.
12. Aparicio S., Chapman J., Stupka E., Putnam N., Chia J.M., Dehal P., Christoffels A.,
    Rash S., Hoon S., Smit A., Gelpke M.D., Roach J., Oh T., Ho I.Y., Wong M., Detter C.,
    Verhoef F., Predkip., Tay A., Lucas S., Richardson P., Smith S.F., Clark M.S., Edwards
    Y.J., Dogget N., Zharkikh A., Tavtigian S.V., Pruss D., Barnstead M., Evans C., Baden
    H., Powell J., Glusman G., Rowan L., Hood L., Tan Y.H., Elgar G., Hawkins T.,
    Venkatesh B., Rokhsar D., Brenner S. Whole-genome shotgun assembly and analysis of
    the genome of Fugu rubripes. Science 297, 1301–1310 (2002).
13. Aparicio S., Morrison, A., Gould, A., Gilthorpe, J., Chaudhuri, C., Rigby, P., Krumlauf,
    R., Brenner S. Detecting conserved regulatory elements with the model genome of
    the Japanese puffer fish, Fugu rupripes. Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.USA 92, 1684–1688, 1995.
14. Venkatesh, B., Si-Hoe, S.L., Murphy, D., Brenner, S. Transgenic rats reveal functional
    conservation of regulatory controls between Fugu isotocin and rat oxytocin genes.
    Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.USA 94, 12462–12466, 1997.
15. Rowitch, D.H., Echelard, Y., Danielian, P.S., Gellner, K., Brenner, S., McMahon, A.P.
    Identification of an evolutionarily conserved 110 base-pair cis-acting regulatory se-
    quence that governs Wnt-1 expression in the murine neural plate. Development 125,
    2735–2746, 1998.
16. Brenner, S. Venkatesh, B., Yap, W.H., Chou, C.F., Tay, A., Ponniah, S., Wang Y., Tan,
    Y.H. Conserved regulation of the lymphocyte-specific expression of lck in the Fugu
    and mammals. Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.USA 99, 2936–2941, 2002.
17. Carrasquillo M.M.., McCallion A.S., Puffenberger E.G., Kashuk C.S., Nouri N.,
    Chakravartim S.A. Genom-wide association study and mouse model identify interac-
    tion between RET and EDNRB pathways in Hirschsprung diease.




282
