                             T   A D E U S   R   E I C H S T E I N




          Chemistry of the adrenal cortex hormones*

                          Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1950**




You have done me the great honour of awarding me a share of the Nobel
Prize for Medicine, together with Dr. Hench and Dr. Kendall, although I
possess no more than a layman’s knowledge of either medicine or physiology.
I hope, therefore, that you will not take it amiss if, in the following remarks,
I have to make use of a number of chemical formulae that possibly not all of
you understand. It is in this case the only adequate language.
      If a chemist wishes to do research on the isolation of physiologically active
materials, he is dependent upon the collaboration of physiologists who assist
him by controllin g t he grading through experimentation on animals. When
I began my researches on adrenal extracts with my colleague Herr J. von
Euw, in the year 1934, we were not in a favourable position. The most
important deficiency symptoms of adrenalectomy were certainly known,
but there were only relatively few quantitative methods to determine the
activity of the extracts. There were really only three:

                                                                     7
(1) The survival test (carried out especially on rats) .
(2) The dog test, after Swingle and Pfiffner (Increase of the non-protein
                                       8,9
        nitrogen level in the blood .
(3)     The   Everse-de   Fremery   test     (adynamia      after    brief   muscular   stimula-




Of these, the dog test was the most sensitive and should also have given
relatively accurate results, but it was not at our disposal. On the other hand,
Tests 1 and 3 were available in laboratories with which we were on friendly
terms. However, both methods require relatively large amounts of material.
Hence the grading of extracts could only be controlled biologically in the

* Owing to lack of time, only a brief survey of the chemistry of these substances can
be given here, for which reason I shall report almost exclusively on our own work.
There are reviews in existence which discuss this field more exactly and give the
                                                                                    1-6
contributions of various research groups, moreover in correct chronological order .
** I wish to thank Dr. H. Dahn for his help in the preparation of this manuscript.


292                                    1 9 5 0   T . R E I C H S T E I N


first stage of purification. The following figures give an orientation for the
process:
   1,000 kg of adrenals from cattle gave in the case of industrial extraction*
an extract with about 1 kg of dry residue. The activity of this extract could
be concentrated to about 25 g by careful distributive operations, without
noticeable loss. Further separating experiments by physical methods (avail-
able at this time) always gave a distribution of activity among several frac-
tions. On the other hand, chemical methods were more successful. With
                                          13
Girard’s and Sandulesco’s ketone reagent T**, the same 25 g could be
divided into the following two groups: about 7-8 g of a ketone group which
contained practically the whole activity, and about 15-16 g of ketone-free
material that was biologically inactive. From this point further biological
control was no more possible for the reasons given above. The whole of the
material available (ketone-free as well as ketone-group7 was therefore sep-
arated into single components as carefully as possible.***
For this the following were used:
  Distributive operations (water, benzene, ether, chloroform).
  Fractional crystallization.
  C h r o m a t o g r a p h y o f t h e a c e t a t e s o n A l 2O 3.
  Only when pure, crystalline, homogeneous substances were produced
were they tested, as far as possible, biologically. However, on account of the
scarcity of material, the accurate determination of chemical structure was
given priority. In nearly all cases this could be elucidated in all its details.
   When I began my researches on adrenal extracts I believed that I was
dealing with a hormone (or hormone mixture) that definitely did not r e p r e -
sent a steroid. The solubilities were very different from those of other ster-
oids. The assumption proved false. As soon as it was possible to perform the
first degradation experiments it became apparent that we were dealing with


                                                                                   12
* Carried out more or less according to the method of Swingle and Pfiffner , but
without the final wasteful purification through water.
* * Dr. A. Girard generously gave us the prescription for the preparation and use of
this reagent before they were published. For this great kindness we wish particularly
to express here also our thanks.
* * * Such a method for the isolation of biologically active material is not only unusual
but extremely troublesome and unreliable. It was employed here only of necessity on
account of the impossibility of a biological control. On the other hand, it was partly
the cause why such a large number of different substances were isolated directly from
the adrenals.


              C H E M I S T R Y   O F   A D R E N A L   C O R T E X   H O R M O N E S        293

steroids and were able to prove this shortly afterwards. The relatively high
solubility in water is due to the high oxygen content.
  From the adrenal extracts the 29 steroids shown in Scheme                             I   were
isolated. *




                    Scheme 1. Steroids isolated from adrenal extracts.


   It is neither possible nor necessary to go into details of these formulae here.
They should show in the main that all these substances are very closely re-
lated to each other. The similarity of the formulae diagrams 3 an expression
of this. Of these 29 steroids, five (the bottom row) were already known;

 * In this table, to save space, the alphabetical designations have been employed as we
originally used them. A larger number of the same substances has been isolated from
the adrenals by Wintersteiner and Pfiffner, as well as by Kendall and his colleagues,
partly before and partly afterwards, who used different alphabetical designations for
some of them. Such alphabetical designations are only of use to identify a substance
when used in conjunction with the writer’s name. Today it is better to use systematic
names. It was possible to establish by direct comparison the identity of a number of
substances isolated independently in the three laboratories mentioned. I would like
to thank sincerely here Dr. Kendall and Dr. Wintersteiner for letting me have material
for comparison.


294                              1 9 5 0   T . R E I C H S T E I N


they occur in other natural substances. The rest are characteristic of the
adrenals. The difference between them is due mainly to the presence or
absence of certain oxygen atoms and to the presence or absence of a double
bond. Of these 29 steroids, 6 were biologically active in the sense that they
prolong the life of adrenalectomized animals and are able to eliminate one or
more of the deficiency symptoms*; these are shown in Scheme 2.
  In the life maintenance test, and in the effectiveness on the electrolyte and




                            Scheme 2. The six active substances.


water metabolism, desoxycorticosterone (I: referred to here as DOCA) is
by far the most effective, and III and VI the weakest; II, IV, and V are
somewhere in between. In other tests, such as those connected-with changes
in carbohydrate metabolism**, the relationship is reversed; I I I-and VI are by
far the most effective and I the weakest.




                  Reciprocal relationship and proof of the steriod nature


(a) C     O
        2 1   5   groups- A whole series of substances from the adrenals contains
21 C-atoms and 5 O-atoms. Out of the eight substances of&is group, four

* Subsequently referred to as "cortin-activity", for short.
                          II
* * Including Ingle’s Test .


               C H E M I S T R Y O F A D R E N A L C O R T E X H O R M O N E S                                      295

were saturated and four were unsaturated. The four saturated representatives

(substances A, C, D, and V) all gave the same triketone VII on oxidation
w i t h C r O3 , t h e f o u r u n s a t u r a t e d m e m b e r s ( E , F a , M , a n d U ) g a v e a n
analogous unsaturated triketone VIII, which was named adrenosterone and
which can be converted to VII by catalytic hydrogenation. This is proof of




                      Scheme 3. Chemical relationship of C 21 O 5 substances.



t h e c l o s e c h e m i c a l r e l a t i o n s h i p o f a l l s u b s t a n c e s o f t h e C2 1 O 5 g r o u p . T h e
two triketones VII and VIII showed distinct androgenic activity with the
cock’s comb test, which gave rise to the suggestion that we were dealing with
steroid derivatives. Shortly afterwards, the reduction of the triketone VII
by Clemmensen’s method was accomplished, whereby the crystalline hydro-
carbon androstane IX was obtained, which was already known through the
                                 14
work of Butenandt . In this way the steroid nature was unequivocally
proved.


296                                    1 9 5 0   T . R E I C H S T E I N




(b) C O group - It was possible to proceed similarly with representa-
       2 1   4


t i v e s o f t h e C2 1O 4 g r o u p , w h i c h c a r r y o x y g e n i n t h e   II   position (see be-
low)*. This will only be indicated for the most important representative of
this group, corticosterone (II). It was possible to convert this substance in
several stages to the hydrocarbon allopregnane (X), which was also ob-




tainable from allopregnanedione-3,20 (XI), by which the steroid structure
was proved unequivocally here.
   I must content myself with these indications and can only add that not
only could the fundamental skeleton be unequivocally proved, but also all
the details of the further formulae given above. This relatively rapid elucida-
tion of the chemical constitution and spatial configuration, with partly very
limited quantities of the substance, was only possible because a few years
ago the correct structure of steroids and bile acids was established through
the work of Wieland, Windaus, Diels, and others, and that of the steroid
sex hormones through the work of Butenandt, Laqueur, Ruzicka, and others,
so that a link with substances of known configuration was possible.



* The establishment of the structure of representatives carrying no oxygen at
position II was easier because degradation as a rule leads to substances which are
known or easily obtainable through partial synthesis.


                 C H E M I S T R Y O F A D R E N A L C O R T E X H O R M O N E S                                  297

             Relationship between chemical structure and biological activity


  Desoxycorticosterone            (I)    is   the     simplest       known        compound          with      "cortin"
  activity (as defined above). If the double bond or the ketone group is hy-
  drogenated, the activity is lost. Alteration of the lateral chain acts in a
  similar manner.




     Two conditions must, then, be fulfilled for the activity:
( I) a , b - U n s a t u r a t e d k e t o n e g r o u p i n g i n r i n g A i n a c c o r d a n c e w i t h t h e p a r -
  tial formula




  (2) Correct lateral chain. Up to now only the two natural ketol groupings
  XII and XIII have shown themselves to be active.
      We have tested with particular care whether other activesubstances with
  other lateral chains exist. This was done by means of partial synthesis.
  Analogues of I were prepared with various lateral chains. Of these only the
  ketoaldehyde XIV showed unequivocal activity, but its effect was weaker
  than that of I. It was indeed noteworthy that a reversion in the asymmetric
  c e n t r e a t C( 1 7 ) w a s s u f f i c i e n t t o d e s t r o y t h e a c t i v i t y o f I ( X V w a s i n -
  active). Also the different dials and triols XVI and XVII, of which more
  stereoisomers exist, and which occur to some extent in adrenal extracts, were
  inactive. The same holds for the hydroxyaldehydes XVIII and XIX, of
  which XIX at least is easily convertible to the active substance XIII with
  a dihydroxyacetone grouping.


298                          1 9 5 0 T . R E I C H S T E I N


                                 Partial syntheses


Naturally we have endeavoured to make the active corticosteroids more
easily accessible by means of partial synthesis. This was achieved first with
                        15
desoxycorticosterone.




                  Scheme 4. Synthesis of desoxycorticosterone.


  This partial synthesis is relatively simple and has been carried out on in-
dustrial scale for a considerable time. DOCA was used successfully in some
cases of adrenal insufficiency. Many patients with Addison’s disease could be
maintained in relatively good condition even if they cannot be considered
as completely adjusted. I was interested to hear briefly from Dr. G. W. Thorn
of Boston that some patients with Addison’s disease, who have recently been
experimentally maintained on cortisone alone with no DOCA, showed fair-
ly serious deficiency symptoms. He has been able to obtain the best substitute
for the organ with DOCA plus cortisone.


          C H E M I S T R Y    O F   A D R E N A L   C O R T E X    H O R M O N E S         299

  Further partial syntheses were concerned above all with the introduction
of an HO or ketone group in the 11 position of the steroid configuration.
Before the discovery of the corticosteroids no natural steroid derivatives
certainly carrying oxygen in the 11 position were known. For evidence of
the constitution and for the synthesis such substances had first to be artifi-
cially prepared. This was first achieved as shown in Scheme 5, starting from
                              16
desoxycholic acid (XX) .




        Scheme 5. Introduction of hydroxyl or ketone group in             II   position.


  The   position   of   the   "inactive"   oxygen     in   the     corticosteroids    was   first
definitely demonstrated with the help of this method. It also served for the
partial synthesis of some corticosteroids with oxygen in the II position, also
                                             17
among others of corticosterone itself . However, for practical purposes it is
too laborious. As physiologists and physicians later demanded ever greater
quantities of such corticosteroids for research and clinical use, better methods
were developed especially by American research workers, and particularly
Kendall, which today are already technically carried out in part (Merck)
but which are still very laborious. They likewise start from desoxycholic
acid (XX).
  A further problem in the partial synthesis of stable corticosteroids was the


300                                    1 9 5 0   T . R E I C H S T E I N


formation of the dioxyacetone lateral chain (XIII) which occurs, for exam-
ple, in 17 hydroxycorticosterone (III) and cortisone (VI). We accomplished
this first as shown in Scheme 6 in the partial synthesis of our substance S
       18
(IV)        .




                           Scheme 6. Partial synthesis of substance S.

   Originally it was not the partial synthesis of (IV) that was attempted in
this way but that of the dihydroxyaldehyde (XXI). It became apparent that
this substance was biologically ineffective. However, it could be rearranged
to the active IV, which was thus obtained artificially for the first time. For
practical purposes this method is much too laborious. In the last two years,
again particularly in the U.S.A., at the cost of a considerable amount of
time, much better methods have been discovered, of which I only mention
                            19                                                  20
here those of Sarett , G a l l a g h e r a n d h i s c o l l a b o r a t o r s , Julian and his col-
                21                                                   22                             23
laborators ,         Miescher    and     his     collaborators ,          and   Wagner   and   Moore .
From what I have heard, Dr. Kendall has also made important contribu-
tions, which are not yet published. It is unfortunately completely impos-
sible for me to name the many other important studies whose aim is to
simplify and cheapen the production of cortisone. For after the clinical results
                                                        2 4 , 2 5
of Hench, Kendall and their colleagues                              it can hardly be doubted that the
future demand for these substances will be very great.


           C H E M I S T R Y    O F   A D R E N A L   C O R T E X   H O R M O N E S   301

  I will therefore indicate in just a few words in which direction we have
sought to bring this wish nearer fulfilment. As stated, the introduction of an
oxygen atom in position II of the steroid skeleton is one of the major dif-
ficulties in the synthetic production of cortisone. The preparation of this
substance from desoxycholic acid still remains a long and laborious way,
even when so many improvements to it have been discovered. If it is wished
to obtain cortisone more simply, there remain two ways:
1. Total synthesis.
2. The discovery of a better qualified raw material.
  Both will be tried. The prospects of a total synthesis are difficult to assess*,
possibly it will be achieved this year, perhaps it will take many years to make
them practicable. I have, with some of my colleagues, attempted to make a
contribution to the second possibility. As stated above there were no nat-
ural substances known before the discovery of the corticosteroids which
were with certainty substituted with oxygen in the II position. However,
two were known of which this was suspected. These were the aglycones of
two cardiac glycosides, namely digoxigenin and sarmentogenin. Tschesche
            26,27
and Bohle           have investigated both, and on the basis of their results have
expressed the opinion that they are stereoisomeric at C (9) and that they both
have the Formula XXII.




  We were able to check digoxigenin first. This is the aglycone of a glyco-
side from Digitalis lanata which will be known to you as digilanid C and is
manufactured in Basle. Professor Stoll as early as 1937 had the kindness
to place 5 g of digoxigenin at our disposal. We degraded it and established

* R.B. Woodward referred to the partial synthesis of an acid which is already very
closely related to cortisone, on the 9th April, 1951, in Boston (Mass.). Cf. R. B. Wood-
ward, F. Sondheimer, D. Taub, K. Heusler and W.M. McLamore, J. Am. Chem. Soc.,
73 (1951) 2403.


 302                                  1 9 5 0   T . R E I C H S T E I N


 that the oxygen atom was not attached at C (11) . Shortly afterwards, Hoehn
                  28
a n d M a s o n in the U.S.A. degraded desoxycholic acid (XX) to 3,12
 diketo-etiocholic acid (XXIII). This proved to be identical with the acid
 obtained from the degrated of digoxigenin. The latter has thus the For-
 mula XXIV and is little more suitable for the manufacture of cortisone than
 the much cheaper desoxycholic acid (XX).




   There still remained sarmentogenin. Here the supply of material was the
                                                                                                     29
 major difficulty. This aglycone was isolated by Jacobs and Heidelberger
 from a sample of S t r o p h a n t h u s seeds which were falsely declared to be S .
 hispidus. The writers knew that it was definitely not S. hispidus w h i c h w a s
 before them and were able to bring forward very good evidence that it was
                                                                             27
 probably S. sarmentosus. Later, Tschesche and Bohlea also isolated sarmen-
 togenin from some analogous seed samples, likewise falsely declared to be
 S. hispidus. The seeds of Strophanthus sarmentosus were never a commercial
 commodity, and we endeavoured first of all for a long time in vain to obtain
 samples of it. We then attempted to obtain S. hispidus, in the hope that we
 would also come across the falsely declared strain, but these seeds were also
 no longer commercially available. Meanwhile the war had broken out and
 a special expedition to Africa could no longer be considered. By chance in
January, 1940, we obtained from the firm of A.G., formerly B. Siegfried,
 of Zofingen, their last reserves of 100 g of seeds, which they had received a
 long     time     before     from   London,     under     the   designation      "semen   Strophanthi
                                                                                    30
 hispidi".       Dr.   Katz     investigated     them     in     my       laboratory .   They   proved
 straightaway to be the desired strain. He was able to obtain 0.3 g of sarmen-
 togenin. The breakdown ran relatively smoothly, and showed that sarmen-
 togenin actually has Formula XXII (p. 305) - that is, carries an HO group
 in the   II   position and therefore would be very suitable as a raw material for
 the artificial production of cortisone if it could be had in greater quantities.
 Recognition of the parent plant was a necessary condition of procuring it.


           C H E M I S T R Y   O F   A D R E N A L   C O R T E X   H O R M O N E S   303




Fig. 1. Strophanthus sarmentosus P.DC.: view of a liana in full flower, which simulta-
neously bears ripe fruit. The leaves have mostly fallen during the time of ripening.
Transition forest near Abuentim, north of Mampong (Ashanti), Gold Coast, February,
                              1948. (Photo Dr. J. Schmutz.)




Fig. 2. Strophantus sarmentosus P.DC.: flowering branch. Place and time as in Fig. I.
                               (Photo Dr. J. Schmutz.)


                                  1 9 5 0   T . R E I C H S T E I N




Fig. 3. Strophanthus sarmentosus P.DC.: view of a liana with fruits shortly before
ripening. The leaves have for the most part fallen. The plant is flowering simultaneously.
                    Place and time as in Fig. 1. (Photo Dr.J. Schmutz.)


  As soon after the war as it became possible, we began to search for it. It
was soon clear that it was not possible to obtain suitable samples of plants
from existing organizations, or state forest, or agricultural stations. The only
possible way was to collect them ourselves. Through the co-operation of the
Basle authorities and the liberal financial help of Basle industry, two as-
sistants (Dr. A. Katz and Dr. J. Schmutz) of the Pharmaceutical Insti-
tute were first able, in 1947, to travel to Africa for nearly nine months, and
examine many medicinal plants, including some seeds of species of Strophan-
t h u s . Naturally, of greatest interest was S. s a r m e n t o s u s . O v e r t w e l v e u n -
questionable samples of this species, some of them relatively large, were col-


           C H E M I S T R Y   O F   A D R E N A L   C O R T E X   H O R M O N E S   305




Fig. 4. Strophanthus sarmentosus P.DC.: ripe fruit. During the ripening, the fruit turns
largely to wood. The follicles are only a little tapered towards the end; length of the
   single follicle is about 25 cm. Place and time as in Fig. 1. (Photo Dr.J. Schmutz.)


lected from various parts of the Gold Coast, Togo, the eastern Ivory Coast
and Southern Nigeria. In Figs. 1-5 are shown some high lianas with fruits,
further individual fruits, flowers and seeds of these plants. The major dif-
ficulty of harvesting the seeds is that the fruits only ripen once a year; the
harvest must be gathered in a relatively short time. Unripe fruits are of little
value; and after the fruits ripen they burst open and the seeds fly out.
  The outcome of the 1947 expedition was negative from the point of view
of cortisone. Strophanthus sarmentosus from the regions named, produced no,


306                            1 9 5 0   T . R E I C H S T E I N


or only traces of, sarmentocymarine, but instead a new glycoside, which we
                      31
n a m e d s a r v e r o s i d and which is not suitable for the manufacture of corti-
sone.
   After this unexpected result we set ourselves the task of investigating as far
as possible all Strophanthus species, as far as they were at all obtainable. This
work goes far beyond what I can describe here. In botanical literature, over
45 different species of Strophanthus are described, some 35 of them in Africa
alone. Up till now we have investigated twenty-one of them, some it is true
insufficiently, on account of shortage of material. This work would be car-
ried out without regard to practical ends; but we believe that it will also be
of practical use. Some of the species examined contain sarmentogenin. We




Fig. 5. Strophanthus sarmentosus P.DC.: ripe single seeds from the high plateau of Togo
                                            31
                     (sample Walkowiak ). (Photo Dr. L. Jenny.)


           C H E M I S T R Y O F A D R E N A L C O R T E X H O R M O N E S          307

also hope very soon to be able to determine the best variant. The seeds of
this plant will only b e available in sufficient quantity for the production of
cortisone if we succeed in cultivating them on a large scale. Whether that is
possible only experimentation can show. At best, practical results will not
be obtained for four or five years as the plants require at least three years
before they bear their first fruits, and four to five years before the first useful
harvest. Perhaps total synthesis will make these experiments unnecessary
from a practical point of view. Nevertheless, we hope to be able to push
forward undisturbed with the investigation of the various Strophanthus s p e -
cies for as long as possible. As with all research into the products of Nature,
unexpected results are possible here also.
  Allow me in closing to thank you sincerely for your friendly attention.




 1. T. Reichstein, in L. Ruzicka and W. Stepp, Ergebnisse der Vitamin- und Hormon-
    forschung (Results of Vitamin and Hormone Research), Vol. I, Leipzig, 1938, p.
    334.
 2. T. Reichstein, in E. Abderhalden, Handbuch der biologischen Arbeitsmethoden (Hand-
    book of Biological Methods), V B., Berlin, 1938, p. 1367.
 3. F.S. Spring, Ann. Rept. Chem. Soc., 40 (1943) 147.
 4. T. Reichstein and C. W. Shoppee, in R. S. Harris and K. V. Thimann, Vitamins and
    Hormones, Vol. I, Academic Press, New York, 1943, p. 345.
 5. M. H. Kuizenga and F. R. Moulton, The Chemistry and Physiology of Hormones,
    Washington, 1944, p. 37.
 6. R. D. H. Heard, The Hormones, Vol. I, New York, 1948, p. 549.
 7. G. F. Cartland and M. H. Kuizenga, Am. J. Physiol., 117 (1936) 678; (earlier
    literature therein.)
 8. G. A. Harrop, J. J. Pfiffner, A. Weinstein, and W. W. Swingle, Proc. Soc. Exptl
    Biol. Med., 29 (1932) 449; W. W. Swingle and J. J. Pfiffner, Medicine, 11 (1932)
     371; (earlier literature therein).
 9. J. J. Pfiffner, W. W. Swingle, and H. M. Vars, J. Biol Chem., 104 (1934) 701.
10. J. W. R. Everse and P. de Fremery, Acta Brevia Neerl. Physiol., 2 (1932) 152; Ned.
                                                                II
     Tijdschr. Geneesk., 77 (1933) 5, 600; cf. also Ingle’s Test .
11. D. J. Ingle, Am. J. Physiol., 116 (1936) 622; (earlier literature therein).
12. W. W. Swingle and J. J. Pfiffner, Am. J. Physiol., 96 (1931) 153, 164, 180; 98
     (1931) 144; J. J. Pfiffner, H. M. Vars, and A. R. Taylor, J. Biol. Chem., 106 (1934)
     625; J. J. Pfiffner and H. M. Vars, J. Biol. Chem., 106 (1934) 645.
13. A. Girard and G. Sandulesco, Helv. Chim. Acta, 19 (1936) 1095.
14. A. Butenandt and K. Tscherning, Z. Physiol. Chem., 229 (1934) 185.
15. M. Steiger and T. Reichstein, Helv. Chim. Acta, 20 (1937) 1164.
16. H. Reich and T. Reichstein, Helv. Chim. Acta, 26 (1943) 562.


308                              1 9 5 0   T . R E I C H S T E I N


17.   A. Lardon and T. Reichstein, Helv. Chim. Acta, 26 (1943) 747.
18.   T. Reichstein and J. von Euw, Helv. Chim. Acta, 23 (1940) 1258; 24 (1941) 1140.
19.   L. H. Sarett, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 70 (1948) 1454; 71 (1949) 2443.
20.   B. A. Köchlin, D. L. Garmaise, T. H. Kritchevski, and T. F. Gallagher, J. Am.
      Chem. Soc, 71 (1949) 3262.
21.   P. L. Julian and W. J. Karpel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 72 (1950) 362; P. L. Julian, E.
      W. Meyer, and J. Ryden, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 72 (1950) 367.
22.   K. Miescher and J. Schmidin, Helv. Chim. Acta, 33 (1950) 1840; J. Heer and K.
      Miescher, Helv. Chim. Acta, 34 (1951) 359.
23.   R. B. Wagner and J. A. Moore, J. Am. Chem. Soc, 72 (1950) 5301.
24.   P. S. Hench, E. C. Kendall, C. H. Slocumb, and H. F. Polley, Proc. Staff Meetings
      Mayo Clinic, 24 (1949) 181.
25.   P. S. Hench, C. H. Slocumb, A. R. Barnes, H. L. Smith, H. F. Polley, and E. C.
      Kendal, Proc. Staff Meetings Mayo Clinic, 24 (1949) 277.
26.   R. Tschesche and K. Bohle, Chem. Ber., 69 (1936) 793.
27.   R. Tschesche and K. Bohle, Chem. Ber., 69 (1936) 2497.
28.   W. M. Hoehn and H. L. Mason, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 60 (1938) 1493.
29.   W. A. Jacobs and M. Heidelberger, J. Biol. Chem., 81 (1929) 765.
30.   A. Katz, Helv. Chim. Acta, 31 (1948) 993.
31.   J. von Euw, A. Katz, J. Schmutz, and T. Reichstein, Festschr. Paul Casparis, Zurich,
      1949, p. 178; A. Buzas, J. von Euw, and T. Reichstein, Helv. Chim. Acta, 33 (1950)
      465.
