                                                                               333




Serendipities of Acquired
Immunity
Nobel Lecture, December 7, 2018 by
Tasuku Honjo
Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.


INTRODUCTION
For a long time, biology was perceived as the lesser of the natural sciences
because, unlike physics, deductive reasoning could not be used to solve
biological problems. Biology has been full of mystery since I started my
career in biological sciences almost half a century ago. Although the basic
principles of biology stem from the rules of physics, biological systems
have such an extraordinary, layered complexity derived from a tremen-
dous number of parameters, beautifully and magically intertwined and
controlled to achieve what we call “life”. Paradoxically, we start with a
rather limited number (about 20,000) of coding region genes. However,
many transcripts can be generated from a single coding gene locus, indi-
cating that a single gene can produce many proteins. Furthermore, there
are a much higher number of non-coding transcripts that may affect the
expression of the coding genes. DNA, RNA and proteins can be chemically
modified by methylation, phosphorylation and acetylation. In addition, at
least 20,000 metabolites circulate in our blood. These can also be sensed
by cells, interacting with various proteins and influencing gene expres-
sion, thus generating enormously complicated regulatory mechanisms to
achieve homeostasis. The origin of metabolites can be traced not only to
the biochemistry of our own cells but also to the diverse communities of


334   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      microbes inhabiting every surface of the body. If we imagine roughly 1013
      order of our own cells, each expressing different proteins and containing
      different metabolites, in constant dialog with 1014 order of microbial cells,
      also in different metabolic states, the complexity of our biological system
      exceeds by far the physical and chemical complexity of the universe. The
      task of a medical scientist is deciphering this overwhelming complexity in
      order to understand the healthy state and diseases. We have yet to get a
      clear vision of exactly how gene expression is regulated. To make a long
      story short, the two major questions that we need to answer in biology
      are, what the mechanisms are for diverse yet strictly specific systems, and
      how these systems, are regulated. Biological regulation is robust, with
      many layers of redundancy as a safeguard. While we still do not have a
      thorough understanding of single-celled organisms like E. coli or yeast,
      multicellular organisms like human beings have far more complex regula-
      tory systems with multiple layers of functional redundancy as well as tre-
      mendous specificities.
          The immune system is perhaps one of the best-studied integrative reg-
      ulatory systems in mammals. A large number of immune cells in different
      activation stages play specific roles, either through direct cell interactions
      or communication via soluble molecules like cytokines and their recep-
      tors. Although immunology is interesting and fascinating for a large audi-
      ence, the immunologists’ language is often misunderstood by other biolo-
      gists, probably because of their use of scientific jargon. The best example
      is the cluster of differentiation (CD) annotation of lymphocyte surface
      molecules, which is necessary but at the same time very limiting and con-
      fusing. Even more difficult for non-aficionados is to understand sophisti-
      cated hypotheses and conceptual frameworks of the regulatory mecha-
      nisms of the immune system, including its innate and acquired immunity
      branches. The acquired immunity emerged during the late stage of our
      evolution. Therefore, this branch of the immune system utilizes all
      pre-existing regulatory systems employed by other systems, such as the
      nervous and endocrine systems. As such, the immune system is an ideal
      biological system to study the enormous specificity and highly sophisti-
      cated regulatory networks acquired by the biological systems during evo-
      lution.
          When I started working on the immune system after my training in
      biochemistry and molecular biology, I often felt uneasy because immunol-
      ogists were concerned mostly with functional aspects of the immune sys-
      tem rather than the molecules responsible. To give just one example,
      many immunologists used the term “antibody” for serum containing hun-
      dreds of proteins! Nevertheless, I witnessed a drastic change in the field
      with the advent of molecular biological techniques that could be easily
      applied to address immunological questions. I was very fortunate to begin


                                                        Tasuku Honjo Lecture   335


my career at a time when molecular biology facilitated the elucidation of
molecular mechanisms for the immune functions using their valuable
assay systems. The most important conceptual questions in immunology
were: a) how does the acquired immune system generate the enormous
diversity required to distinguish myriads of microorganisms and sub-
stances foreign to our body and b) how does this enormously diverse rec-
ognition system discriminate between self versus non-self? Basically,
these major immunological questions also represent the core questions in
biology: how organisms can have enormous numbers of reactions with
highly specific yet robust regulations.


IMMUNOGLOBULIN DIVERSITY
Karl Landsteiner was astonished by the observations that almost all syn-
thesized organic compounds bound to proteins could induce generation
of specific antibodies (Ab) or immunoglobulins (Ig) by B cells in animals.
This brought the question of how many Ig genes might exist there to gen-
erate such a diverse repertoire of Ab. Around 1970, the Ig structure had
been elucidated by the efforts of many scientists, including Rodney Porter
and Gerald Edelman, by finding that a typical Ab like IgG, consists of two
identical light (L) and two heavy (H) chains linked by disulfide bonds
(Edelman, 1959; Porter, 1959). Frank Putnam (Titani et al., 1965) and two
of Edelman’s colleagues, Norbert Hilschman and Lyman Craig
(Hilschmann et al., 1965), discovered that the human L chain has two dis-
tinct regions, the N-terminal variable (V) and the C-terminal constant (C)
region. The next obvious question was related to the number of V and C
genes. How many V genes or C genes are there? Do we have the same
number of V and C genes, or perhaps a large number of V genes and a
small number of C genes? Two major hypotheses were put forward to
explain the enormous Ab diversity. The ‘germline hypothesis’ claimed
that there might be as many as one thousand genes responsible for the Ab
diversity phenomenon. Another hypothesis proposed by Sir Frank Mac-
farlane Burnet, called ‘somatic hypermutation theory’, claimed that
somatic mutations could be responsible for the generation of enormous
diversity of the lymphocyte repertoire starting from a rather limited num-
ber of inherited genes. This debate caught the attention of not only immu-
nologists but also biologists in general.
    After I obtained my Ph. D. in Osamu Hayaishi’s laboratory, I went to
the United States of America to carry out my postdoctoral training (Fig.
1). In 1972, I listened to a lecture by Donald Brown from the Department
of Embryology of the Carnegie Institution of Washington in Baltimore
(Fig. 2). He proposed a very brave idea in support of the germline hypoth-
esis, which postulates that animals have a large number of V and C genes.


336   THE NOBEL PRIZES



                                                                 Figure 1. Osamu
                                                                 Hayaishi and
                                                                 myself around
                                                                 1996.




                                                                 Figure 2. Donald
                                                                 Brown at Carnegie
                                                                 Institution in
                                                                 Baltimore, 1971.




      Assuming the V and C sequences to be reiterated more than a hundred
      times, the major problem of the germline hypothesis was finding a mech-
      anism for keeping many copies of the C gene unchanged while many cop-
      ies of V genes varied. The evolutionary selection pressure on each copy of
      the C gene would be very weak if there were many copies of the same
      gene. Don proposed that the frequent homologous recombination could
      repair genetic mutations and maintain a large number of copies of the Ig
      C genes. The idea came from his own study on the structure of the ribo-
      somal RNA or the 5S RNA genes, both of which consist of the spacer and
      RNA coding regions which correspond to alternating V and C region
      sequences, respectively (Brown et al., 1968). A set of the spacer and cod-
      ing regions is tandemly repeated almost a thousand times in the riboso-
      mal RNA gene loci, which are often located close to the telomere of the


                                                        Tasuku Honjo Lecture    337



                                                             Figure 3. Philip
                                                             Leder at NIH,
                                                             1973.




chromosome where the homologous recombination frequency is expected
to be high.
   That seminar struck me like a lightning bolt. I knew that the question
was very important, but only then did I realize that emerging molecular
biological techniques could be used to find an answer. I was fortunate
that Philip Leder at NIH accepted me into his laboratory to work on this
question (Fig. 3). Our results indicated that the number of copies of the
IgL (Cκ or Cλ) chain gene is low, one or a few at most, ironically disprov-
ing Don’s germline hypothesis (Honjo et al., 1974). The results also sug-
gested that some gene alterations, either somatic mutations, recombina-
tion events or both are required to generate diverse Ab from a small num-
ber of C genes. Indeed, soon afterwards Susumu Tonegawa discovered
that recombination of a small number of variable (V), diversity (D) and
joining (J) segments generates a repertoire of millions of unique receptor
genes during lymphocyte differentiation (Brack et al., 1978).


CLASS SWITCH RECOMBINATION AND AID
Upon returning to Japan in 1974 to the University of Tokyo, I was thinking
long and hard about what fundamental problem I could tackle while set-
ting up my own small laboratory. I finally decided to work on the IgH
chain genes to address the specific question related to molecular mecha-
nism of Ig isotype or class switching, thus avoiding direct competition for
the mechanism of Ab repertoire generation on which Phil, Susumu and
many others were working. It was known that antigen stimulation of
mature B cells induces isotype class switching, a process that replaces the
H chain C (CH) region gene without changing antigen-binding specificity
of the V region gene. The CH region determines the Ig classes such as IgM,


338   THE NOBEL PRIZES



                                                                      Figure 4. Anti-
                                                                      body memory
                                                                      generation by
                                                                      vaccine (antigen)
                                                                      administration.




      IgG, IgE and IgA. Another genetic alteration associated with antigenic
      stimulation of B cells is somatic hypermutation, a process known to facil-
      itate generation of high-affinity Ab. These two phenomena represent the
      basis of immunological antibody memory and are critical to successful
      vaccination (Fig. 4).

      We were very fortunate to find a collaborator, Masao Ono, who estab-
      lished the method for immunoprecipitating the Ig protein-mRNA com-
      plexes in polysomes, from which we could purify H chain messenger RNA
      rather quickly (Ono et al., 1977). Using the cDNA from this purified
      mRNA, Tohru Kataoka and I were surprised to find the copy number of
      the CH gene differed among DNA obtained from various myelomas pro-
      ducing different classes of Ig. By comparing the copy number of Cϒ genes
      in DNAs of more than 10 myelomas expressing different CH genes, I real-
      ized that a simple deletion between the expressed VH gene and the CH
      gene to be expressed could explain this phenomenon if the CH gene were
      aligned in a specific order. We proposed the allelic deletion model of the
      Ig CH locus (Honjo et al., 1978).
          In 1997, I isolated the first important CH gene, Cϒ1 from purified Cϒ1
      mRNA while on three-month stay in Phil’s lab. Once Cϒ1 cDNA was
      cloned, it did not take long to clone other CH genes and to convincingly
      prove that DNA recombination occurs by the isolation of actively tran-
      scribed Ig H chain genes (Kataoka et al., 1980). This discovery was made
      amid incredible competition, as in addition to us, four other groups
      reached the same conclusion almost simultaneously (Cory, 1981; Davis et
      al., 1980; Maki et al., 1980; Rabbitts et al., 1981). Finally, four years after
      we first conceived the allelic deletion, we were able to elucidate how all
      CH genes are aligned on the mouse chromosome (Shimizu et al., 1982).


                                                                   Tasuku Honjo Lecture   339


We then proved that the deleted DNA segments are looped out from the
chromosome (Iwasato et al., 1990), a useful finding allowing us later to
measure ongoing class switch recombination (CSR). Importantly, CSR
takes place in the intergenic regions in the CH locus, characterized by
highly repetitive sequences. By studying how the Ig H chain locus is
arranged in the mouse chromosome, we saw that each CH region gene is
proceeded by a region (a few to 10 Kb) of highly repetitive DNA which we
named the switch (S) region (Kataoka et al., 1981) (Fig. 5). Biologically,
CSR must be very efficient because it takes place immediately after anti-
gen stimulation. The structure we revealed fulfills this requirement
because CSR can take place anywhere within the large S regions, unlike
the site-specificity of V(D)J recombination.
   Retrospectively, these studies were milestones in understanding immune
diversity, yet I was determined to identify the enzyme(s) responsible for
this efficient type of recombination. For this purpose, it was essential to set
up a good cellular system to measure class switching in vitro. It was fortu-
nate that Eva Severinson proposed collaboration for isolation of as-yet-un-
known soluble factor that induces class switching. Using a factor-secreting
T cell line that she developed, we isolated cDNA encoding interleukin 4 (IL-
4) and IL-5, which turned out to be critical cytokines to not only class
switching of B cells but also other important aspects of lymphocyte differ-
entiation (Azuma et al., 1986; Noma et al., 1986).
   Another important tool that helped elucidating enzymatic mechanisms
of CSR was the B1 cell tumor-derived line CH12, obtained from Warren
Strobel at NIH in the early ’90s. Although the original cell line had a very
high background and low switching efficiency, we repeatedly recloned the
CH12 cells and finally obtained the CH12F3 line. This subclone contained




Figure 5. Class switch recombination takes place by deletion of a large DNA segment.


340   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      less than 1 percent IgA positive cells under non-stimulated condition but
      switched to more than 50 percent IgA positive cells after stimulation with
      IL-4, TGF-β1 and CD40 ligand (Nakamura et al., 1996). The system was
      used by Masamichi Muramatsu to carry out subtractive hybridization
      between nonstimulated and stimulated cells, which led to identification of
      the 23c9 cDNA clone, specifically expressed by activated CH12F3 cells,
      and also uniquely detected in germinal center B cells but not in other
      cells. Its sequence revealed the strongest homology with the RNA editing
      enzyme APOBEC1, and had weak cytidine deaminase activity in vitro. We
      named it Activation-Induced cytidine Deaminase (AID) (Muramatsu et
      al., 1999). AID-deficient mice completely lost not only class switching but
      also SHM, a finding which was unexpected as these two genetic altera-
      tions were thought to be mediated by different enzymes (Muramatsu et
      al., 2000) (Fig. 6). AID was thus shown to be the enzyme I had dreamed
      of finding for so long. Using the human AID primers, we designed, and
      our collaborators Anne Durandy and Allan Fisher identified, that every
      one of their Hyper-IgM syndrome type 2 patients had mutations in the
      AID gene (Revy et al., 2000). The phenotypes of AID deficiency in human
      and mouse were remarkably similar. Thus, we obtained clear evidence
      that AID is the enzyme that engraves antigen memory in the antibody
      genes, which serves as the mechanistic basis of vaccination.
          However, the molecular mechanism of AID is still not fully resolved.
      Although we have accumulated evidence supporting the idea that RNA is
      directly edited by AID (Begum et al., 2015), most scientists in this field




      Figure 6. AID-deficient mice lost both CSR and SHM.


                                                                 Tasuku Honjo Lecture   341




Figure 7. AID engraves Ab memory in the genome for effective vaccination.




believe that AID edits the DNA directly (Meng et al., 2015). Nonetheless, it
is now clear that B cell DNA rearrangements occur in two stages. Devel-
oping B cells in the bone marrow first generate the V region repertoire by
V(D)J recombination. When B cells encounter antigens in the peripheral
lymphoid tissues, they are activated to express the AID enzyme that
induces SHM and CSR (Fig. 7). Occasionally, however, AID expression
can cause aberrant chromosomal translocation between Ig and onco-
genes like c-myc, generating leukemias like B cell lymphoma. The idea
that immune activation could lead to tumorigenesis was totally unex-
pected by many immunologists at the time.


DISCOVERY OF PD-1 AND ITS APPLICATION
The great mystery that comes with our immense immune diversity is how
to avoid immune activity against oneself. The phenomenon, known as
immune tolerance, was theoretically proposed by Sir Frank Macfarlane
Burnet and demonstrated by Sir Peter Brian Medawar, for which they
shared the 1960 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. Sir Frank also
proposed that tumor cells may express non-self antigens which the
immune system would recognize and eliminate by the mechanism called
immune surveillance (Burnet, 1957). Tumor cells, however, can grow
when they induce the immune system into an inactive state i.e. immune


342   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      tolerance by reasons unknown even today. Such ideas and observations
      initiated what would become the field of cancer immunotherapy.
         Many scientists tested various approaches to cure cancers; for exam-
      ple, some identified tumor-specific antigens and injected them as vac-
      cines into patients. Others infused patients with their own T cells after
      expanding the cells in the laboratory with IL-2. Injections with
      immune-stimulating cytokines such as interferon-γ, IL-2 or IL-12 were
      also extensively pursued. Unfortunately, these trials did not provide any
      clear clinical benefits. In retrospect, all these trials were analogous to
      pressing an accelerator of the immune system under the condition of
      strong braking, because the immune system of cancer patients was in a
      state of immune tolerance. Indeed, until the mid-1990s, none of the mole-
      cules responsible for this negative immune regulation had been identified.
         The new era of the immune regulation came when Pierre Golstein dis-
      covered the CTLA-4 molecule and when subsequent studies by Jim Alli-
      son, Jeffrey Bluestone, Craig Thomson, Tak Mak and Arlene Sharpe’s
      groups revealed that CTLA-4 is a negative regulator involved in prevent-
      ing the initial activation of the immune system (Brunet et al., 1987; Krum-
      mel et al., 1995; Tivol et al., 1995; Walunas et al., 1994; Waterhouse et al.,
      1995). Indeed, CTLA-4 regulates the immune activation in an on-off man-
      ner in pair with CD28, in a manner equivalent to the parking brake (Fig.
      8). Independently, we found another negative regulator called PD-1 that
      regulates the immune reaction in a rheostatic manner in pair with the
      accelerator ICOS. PD-1 was fortuitously isolated by Yasumasa Ishida, who
      had worked intensely on isolating the proteins involved in T cell selection
      in thymus, in order to answer the major question of how immune cells
      establish self-tolerance during development. He stimulated T cell lines
      derived from the thymus followed by cDNA subtraction to compare the




      Figure 8. Brakes and accelerators control immune reactions like those in a car.


                                                                  Tasuku Honjo Lecture   343




Figure 9. Discovery of PD-1 (programmed death-1) cDNA and its structure.



genes expressed by either growing or dying cells. He isolated four inde-
pendent clones, which were surprisingly derived from a single mRNA.
The cDNA sequence revealed a very interesting molecule we named pro-
grammed cell death 1 (PD-1) (Ishida et al., 1992). PD-1 is a cell surface
receptor with a cytoplasmic domain containing a pair of tyrosines, which
is conserved among then known activation-signal transducing receptors.
However, PD-1 is distinct from the rest by the double length between the
two tyrosine residues (Fig. 9). We subsequently found that PD-1 expres-
sion is strongly induced in T cells and B cells upon stimulation (Agata et
al., 1996). We easily excluded the possibility that PD-1 is involved in cell
death by the absence of PD-1 expression during the normal cell apoptosis
induced by dexamethazone.
    Although Hiroyuki Nishimura generated the PD-1 knockout (KO) mice
in 1994, it took us a long time to understand the function of PD-1 in vivo,
as deleting the gene in mice of a mixed genetic background seemed to
confer no ill effects. The first hint of the negative regulatory function of
PD-1 was obtained when he found that B cells from PD-1 deficient mice
had stronger responses to antigen stimulation in vitro (Nishimura et al,
1998). When crossing the PD-1 KO mice with autoimmune-prone lpr/lpr
mice, PD-1 deficiency accelerated the development of severe nephritis
and arthritis around five months after birth. Eventually, we also found
that when using the common laboratory C57BL/6 strain, PD-1 KO mice
also developed autoimmune nephritis and arthritis but only by around 14


344   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      months (Nishimura et al., 1999). Surprisingly, on the BALB/c background,
      the PD-1 deficiency induced dilated cardiomyopathy, suggesting that
      while PD-1 is important for fending off the initiation of autoimmune dis-
      ease, the specific organs targeted might be affected by other genes (Nishi-
      mura et al., 2001). To confirm this idea, we examined consequences of the
      lack of PD-1 inhibitory function by crossing PD-1 KO mice with other
      autoimmune-prone mice commonly used by immunologists. Taku Oka-
      zaki found that PD-1 deficiency on the NOD background causes exacer-
      bation of diabetes, while on the MRL background the absence of PD-1
      causes severe myocarditis (Wang et al., 2005; Wang et al., 2010) (Fig. 10).
      Regarding the signaling characteristics of PD-1, Taku was able to eluci-
      date the molecular mechanism for its immune brake function. He showed
      that the engagement of PD-1 induces phosphorylation of the conserved
      tyrosine residues, which recruits SHP2 phosphatase and dephosphoryl-
      ates signaling molecules phosphorylated by antigen receptor engagement,
      resulting in down-modulation of activation signals (Okazaki et al., 2001).
      All the above results provided strong evidence that PD-1 is the second
      new negative regulator of the immune system. However, in contrast to
      CTLA-4 deficiency, which develops severe autoimmunity leading to death
      by four to five weeks after birth, PD-1 deficiency results in autoimmunity
      developing more slowly and with milder phenotypes. Such results




      Figure 10. PD-1 is a negative regulator.


                                                                  Tasuku Honjo Lecture   345


convinced us that PD-1 modulation might be a very good approach for the
treatment of various immune-related diseases, including cancer.
   Meantime, I wanted to isolate the ligand for PD-1 and collaborated
with Steve Clark at the Genetic Institute (GI) in Boston. Unexpectedly,
Gordon Freeman from the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute chose many
cDNAs encoding B7 family member proteins from a database list, and one
of the clones, 292, was shown to bind our PD-1-expressing cell line by the
GI group. We confirmed their results and further demonstrated that 292
protein binding to the PD-1 receptor inhibits T cell proliferation. The
identification of PD-1 ligand, which we named PD-L1, was reported in
2000 (Freeman et al. 2000).
   Before the dawn of the new millennium, we started to test the effect of
PD-1 deficiency on tumor cell growth. Yoshiko Iwai performed experi-
ments comparing the growth of myelomas expressing PD-L1 between
mice with or without PD-1 by the middle of 2000. She found that PD-1
deficiency suppressed the growth of PD-L1 expressing tumor cells (Fig.
11). The results convinced me that blocking PD-1 with an antibody would
be effective to suppress the tumor growth. We urgently needed a PD-1
blocking Ab to confirm that this strategy could be used for cancer ther-
apy. Our long-term collaborator, Nagahiro Minato, and his colleagues had
already begun generating good Ab against PD-1 and PD-L1. Our laborato-
ries embarked on an exciting and fruitful collaborative effort, and
Yoshimasa Tanaka from Minato’s laboratory showed that the PD-L1 Ab




Figure 11. Suppression of B16 melanoma metastasis by PD-1 Ab and inhibition of tumori-
genesis of myeloma (J558L) in PD-1-/- mice.


346   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      they had generated could efficiently suppress tumor growth in a variety of
      mouse models (Iwai et al., 2002) (Fig. 12). Yoshiko further confirmed that
      PD-1 blockade by either genetic manipulation or PD-1 Ab treatment
      clearly suppressed the metastasis of B16 melanoma cells from spleen to
      liver (Iwai et al., 2005) (Fig. 11). These findings showed that PD-1 block-
      ade by Ab against either PD-1 or PD-L1 is a powerful tool for treatment of
      cancers, preventing and delaying the growth and spread of tumor cells
      (Fig. 13).




      Figure 12. Growth inhibition of PD-L1 expressing mastocytoma (P815/PD-L1) and
      extension of animal survival by PD-L1 Ab.




      Figure 13. Schematic representation of tumor killing using Ab against either PD-1 or PD-L1.


                                                        Tasuku Honjo Lecture   347


CANCER IMMUNOTHERAPY BY PD-1 BLOCKADE
In order to apply this treatment to humans, we needed to file a patent
application and obtain help from the pharmaceutical industry. After much
struggle and many illusions and disillusions − which I describe in my
biography − Medarex, a small venture capital already working with Jim
Allison on a CTLA-4 monoclonal Ab, began to generate blocking PD-1
Abs in collaboration with Ono Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. The human
anti-PD-1 Ab named Nivolumab was an IgG4 with a mutation at S228P to
reduce Ab-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity and approved as an
investigation new drug by the FDA on August 1, 2006. Clinical trials were
initiated immediately in the United States and two years later in Japan.
The first Phase I clinical trial was comprehensively summarized by
Suzanne Topalian and her colleagues (Topalian et al., 2012). The results of
this study surprised the scientific immunology community and many cli-
nicians, because about 20 to 30 percent of terminal-stage patients with
very aggressive forms of cancers such as non-small cell lung cancer, mela-
noma or renal cancer showed complete or partial responses. Perhaps
even more surprising was the finding that 20 out of 31 responders of mel-
anoma patients continued to respond for more than one year, some even
after stopping the treatment (Fig. 14). Such durable responses had not
been experienced with any other chemotherapy regimens. We also started




Figure 14. Durable response to PD-1 blockade.


348   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      a Phase II trial on platinum-resistant ovarian cancer patients in collabo-
      ration with the Gynecology Department of Kyoto University Hospital.
      Although the study was rather small, the results were promising. We were
      astonished to find that in about 40 percent of patients, responded or com-
      pletely stopped the tumor growth (Hamanishi et al., 2015) (Fig. 15). Two
      patients who showed a complete response after one year of PD-1 blockade
      are still healthy almost five years after stopping the treatment (Fig. 16).




      Figure 15. Phase II trial of anti-PD-1 Ab in patients with platinum-resistant ovarian cancer.




      Figure 16. Durable complete responses of ovarian cancer patients to Nivolumab.


                                                               Tasuku Honjo Lecture   349


Numerous clinical trials carried out around the world during the last six
years were recently summarized (Gong et al., 2018). I was most impressed by
a randomized study on 418 melanoma patients, on whom the effect of either
Nivolumab or chemotherapy (Dacarbazine) was compared. The outcome
was quite impressive. Almost 70 percent of the Nivolumab group survived
after a year and a half, compared with less than 20 percent of the Dacarba-
zine group. At this point the study was stopped as it was deemed unethical to
continue Dacarbazine treatment in the face of such clear clinical benefits
from Nivolumab (Robert et al., 2015) (Fig. 17). This large-scale study was car-
ried out by an international team of clinicians in the European Union, Can-
ada and Australia. Another striking clinical study has been reported for
Hodgkin lymphoma cases. Without exception, all of the 23 Hodgkin lym-
phoma patients with various treatment histories showed either complete
responses (four cases), partial responses (16 cases) or stable diseases (three
cases) (Ansell et al., 2015). Thanks to the enormous effort of scientists, clini-
cal doctors, patients, bioinformaticians and other researchers in these stud-
ies and many more, by 2018 more than a dozen tumor types have been
approved for the treatment by PD-1 blockade therapy. Most recently, the FDA
approved this treatment to all microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H) can-
cers, regardless of the origin of their tumors. I view this as a very wise deci-
sion by the regulator, as it lifts the financial burden from drug companies to
run expensive clinical trials for the many potential tumor types that might
benefit from PD-1 treatment, greatly speeding up access to this new drug for
many additional patients. Clearly, PD-1 blockade treatment has brought a
paradigm shift in cancer therapy due to its efficacy over a wide range of tum-
ors; durability of its effects in those who respond; and importantly, there are
few adverse effects compared with previous treatments.




Figure 17. Randomized study on untreated melanoma patients with Nivolumab and Da-
carbazine (chemotherapy).


350   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      But how can we explain the success of checkpoint immunotherapy such
      as PD-1 Ab treatment? Extensive DNA sequencing of a variety of tumors
      revealed enormous accumulation of mutations in the DNA of almost all
      cancer cells. Mutation frequencies in coding regions can reach the levels
      of one thousand to 10 thousand-fold higher than those of normal cells,
      which generally have few, if any, mutations (Alexandrov et al., 2013; Mar-
      tincorena et al., 2015). Melanomas have the highest mutation frequency,
      followed by lung cancers. In fact, almost all types of tumors have 100
      times more mutations compared with normal cells. Summarizing the
      results of many studies as follows: Firstly, cells become cancerous by
      accumulating a large number of mutations, changing their appearance
      from normal cells. These changes can be detected by our immune sys-
      tem’s ability to home in on ‘foreignness’, meaning cancer immunotherapy
      is potentially effective for all types of cancers; secondly, this large
      increase in mutations also makes it difficult to identify which among
      them can be targeted by chemotherapy drugs; thirdly, frequent mutations
      continue to generate tumor cells that are resistant to chemotherapy,
      whereas the T cells with enormous immune repertoire can recognize and
      attack not only original but also mutated tumor cells.
          Nevertheless, there are many hurdles ahead before declaring immuno-
       therapy’s complete victory over cancer. There are several obvious issues
       emerging from the clinical trials. First of all, the efficacy of this treatment
       is still limited. For example, for melanoma, the success rate of PD-1 block-
       ade therapy as the first line of treatment reached about 70 percent at best
       (Robert et al., 2015). In most other cases, especially when used as the sec-
       ond or the third line of treatment, the efficacy rate was 20–30 percent.
       Thus, we must urgently address two problems. One is how we can predic-
       tively distinguish responders from non-responders to PD-1 blockade. The
       other is how we can significantly improve the efficacy of the PD-1 immu-
       notherapy.
          Predictive markers could be related to tumor characteristics. For exam-
       ple, a high mutation rate of tumor cells is one good indicator for respon-
       siveness to PD-1 blockade therapy as mentioned above. PD-L1 expression
       by tumors was also considered but unfortunately was not efficiently pre-
       dictive of responder status (Colwell, 2015). The other factors influencing
       the response rate of cancer immunotherapy are related to the individual’s
       immune capacity, which is at present very difficult to predict. Since there
       are hundreds of genes involved in the immune responses, and multiple
      ­layers of regulation, it is not easy to predict an individual’s immune power,
       for example, by looking at their genetic polymorphisms. Environmental
       factors, such as the host microbial communities in the gut, also seem
       likely to play an important role in modulating immune responses and per-
       haps tumor features as well. Thus, in the near future, we will strive to


                                                        Tasuku Honjo Lecture   351


understand the best combinatorial factors predictive for a positive out-
come of immunotherapy.
    Needless to say, improving the immunotherapy response rate would
help a great many additional cancer patients, and we are working towards
this in two different ways in our current research. Firstly, we are testing
ways to increase the number of cytotoxic T cells (CTL) that infiltrate and
kill tumors. We recently showed that the first important steps in CTL
activation and proliferation occur in tumor-draining lymph nodes. Once
they are activated and decorated with responsive receptors, CTLs migrate
to the tumor site in response to a gradient of chemokines secreted from
the tumor site (Chamoto et al., 2017). We showed that tumor growth
could no longer be suppressed by PD-L1 Ab when draining lymph nodes
were surgically removed in tumor-bearing mice that were otherwise
responsive to PD-1 blockade. This is because activation of CTL in drain-
ing lymph nodes is prerequisite for upregulation of CXCR3, a receptor
responding to several chemokines, such as CXCL9, CXCL10 and CXCL11.
Interestingly, CXCL9 is actually produced by tumor tissues in response to
interferon-γ secreted by pre-existing tumor, infiltrating CTLs upon stimu-
lation with PD-1 blocking Ab. Thus, lymph nodes appear to be critical to
initiate the activation and to deploy the CTLs to the tumor sites, in turn
further facilitating the recruitment of more CTLs from lymph nodes in
what appears to be a positive feedback loop. These results suggest that
surgeons should avoid removing healthy lymph nodes during dissection
of tumors in order to safeguard protective immune responses.
    Another approach to strengthening PD-1 blockade which is being pur-
sued by many scientists and pharmaceutical companies around the world
is combination therapy. Amazingly, in the United States alone, more than
one thousand clinical trials testing PD-1 blockade in combination therapy
are currently ongoing (Tang et al., 2018). The most commonly used com-
bination partners for PD-1 blockade are CTLA-4 Ab, followed by chemo-
therapy, radiotherapy, anti-VEGF agents, and chemoradiotherapy. It is
important to remember that neither chemo- nor radiotherapy could show
appropriate effects on tumor growth if the immune system is defective in
animal models (Apetoh et al., 2007; Takeshima et al., 2010).
    Our own laboratory took a totally different approach. We and others
found that T cell activation is accompanied by a burst of activity by the
cells’ mitochondria, the energy-producing organ of the cell (Chamoto et
al., 2017; Fox et al., 2005). This energy is probably needed to support the
cell division that quickly follows antigenic stimulation. CTLs divide
almost every 8 hours, requiring a large amount of building blocks and
energy to produce the proteins and nucleic acids required to build a
daughter cell several times per day. We therefore searched for chemicals
that can boost mitochondrial activity in active T cells. PGC-1α is a key


352   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      transcriptional cofactor boosting fatty-acid oxidation and oxidative phos-
      phorylation, which are crucial to mitochondrial activation (Chamoto et
      al., 2017; Ventura-Clapier et al., 2008). In my lab, Kenji Chamoto screened
      for chemicals which influenced PGC1-α activity in the context of PD-1
      blockade therapy. He found that Bezafibrate, already approved as a drug
      for hyperlipidemia, synergizes with anti-PD-L1 Ab for suppression of
      tumor growth (Chamoto et al., 2017) (Fig. 18). Subsequently, we found
      that Bezafibrate has two important activities for increasing the number of
      tumor-specific CTLs at the tumor site (Chowdhury et al., 2018). By acti-
      vating PGC-1α and PPAR signaling, Bezafibrate facilitates rapid prolifera-
      tion of effector CTLs. Also, enhanced PPAR signaling by Bezafibrate
      appears to prevent cell death, and to facilitate long-term survival of the
      activated CTLs. We are now carrying out the Phase I clinical trial in
      Japan, combining PD-1 blockade with Bezafibrate. I hope the large num-
      ber of trials currently underway will soon identify many other strategies
      to improve the efficacy of PD-1 blockade.


      FUTURE PROSPECTS FOR PD-1 BLOCKADE CANCER THERAPY
      In parallel with improvement strategies for successful therapy, I see the
      need to push forward the basic fundamental understanding of the whole
      body. In other words, we need to invest more effort into understanding
      physiology, a challenging task as I have already pointed out. We found
      that PD-1 deficiency manifests different types of organ-specific autoim-
      munity in different laboratory mouse strains. As expected, some of the




      Figure 18. Improvement of PD-1 blockade therapy by Bezafibrate.


                                                                  Tasuku Honjo Lecture   353




Figure 19. Hyperimmune activity can be read in the blood biochemistry of PD-1 KO mice.



patients undergoing PD-1 blockade therapy develop similar autoimmune
features. Some adverse effects of PD-1 blockade are partly due to the fact
that T cells proliferate vigorously after stimulation to generate functional
progeny, requiring a huge amount of energy and metabolites to build new
nucleic acids and proteins. Indeed, Sidonia Fagarasan’s group recently
showed that activation of the immune system limits the systemic availa-
bility of amino acids, hindering the synthesis of neurotransmitters in the
brain (Miyajima et al., 2017) (Fig. 19). Serum depletion of tryptophan and
tyrosine, for example, reduces the amounts of serotonin and dopamine in
the brain and causes behavioral changes like enhanced fear responses and
anxiety. Such systemic biochemical changes were observed in PD-1 defi-
cient mice as well as in normal mice under strong antigenic stimulation.
    Furthermore, the harmful hyperimmune activation in PD-1 deficient
mice is caused not only by the absence of this inhibitory receptor but also
by dysregulated microbial communities in the gut (Kawamoto et al.,
2012). Indeed, Sidonia’s group showed that in addition to AID, PD-1 is an
essential molecule required to generate and select proper IgAs responsi-
ble for maintenance of a healthy microbial ecosystem in the gut (Fig. 20).
The absence of PD-1 causes a skewing of balance between T and B cells
in the germinal centers, with expansion of germinal center T cells per-
turbing the normal process of selection and maturation of IgA repertoire
needed to maintain gut symbiosis.
    Sidonia’s amazing research in this area extended our understanding of
PD-1 functions and grew from her own findings on hyperimmune activa-
tion caused by microbiota dysbiosis in AID-deficient mice (Fagarasan et
al., 2002; Suzuki et al., 2004). She is the first person who showed that
skewed microbiota in the gut can activate the immune system throughout


354   THE NOBEL PRIZES




      Figure 20. AID and PD-1 cooperate in germinal centers for IgA selection to
      maintain microbiome and body homeostasis.




      the body in the AID-deficiency mouse model. Most strikingly, in the
      absence of IgA, expansion of certain species of anaerobic bacteria caused
      enlarged nodular structures along the whole intestinal tract, as well as
      hypertrophia of all lymphoid tissues. How fortunate I am to have discov-
      ered the two critical molecules, AID and PD-1, which by a certain amount
      of chance became the focus of my research, and collaborate in such a fas-
      cinating way to control not only the immune system but also the ecosys-
      tem of the gut which is so important for whole-body balance.
         Based on these studies, it was perhaps not surprising to find that PD-1
      blockade therapy can be influenced by the bacterial communities in the
      gut (Sivan et al., 2015). We also put into test this by evaluating the anti-tu-
      mor activity of AID-deficient mice and found that tumor growth is dra-
      matically inhibited in AID-deficient mice even without PD-1 Ab treatment
      (M. Akrami and R. Menzies, unpublished data). Sidonia’s group further
      confirmed that the hyperimmune activity against tumor growth in
      AID-deficient mice depends on microbiota, because AID-deficient mice
      raised in germ-free conditions lost strong anti-tumor activity (M. Miya-
      jima and S. Fagarasan, unpublished data). Thus, PD-1 is critical for regu-
      lation of CTLs against tumors but AID as well as PD-1 is important for
      boosting the immune potential against tumors through microbiota regu-
      lation, strongly indicating that gut microbiota is critical to the anti-tumor
      activity of individual immunity (Fig. 20).
         In summary, I feel that despite enormous recent progress, our knowl-
      edge of the immune system and its interactions with other systems is still
      very limited. We are just at the beginning of an exploration that will lead
      us to a better understanding of how our bodies function. Even a single


                                                           Tasuku Honjo Lecture   355


molecule, PD-1, has so many unanticipated effects on aspects of health
and disease, from tipping the balance of the immune system towards
autoimmunity, to regulating bacterial communities, to major changes in
the biochemistry of the immune, circulatory and nervous systems.
Achieving successful immunotherapy implies learning more not only
about improving cancer outcomes, but also understanding all the effects
of the treatment on the rest of the body.
    In 2016 Andy Coghlan published an article entitled “Closing in on can-
cer” in New Scientist magazine. Regarding the PD-1 blockade therapy, he
quoted Dan Chen from Genentech saying “We are at the point where we
have discovered the cancer equivalent to penicillin.” They considered
PD-1 blockade therapy to be comparable to the discovery of penicillin for
infectious diseases. “Although penicillin itself couldn’t cure all infections,
it gave rise to a whole generation of antibiotics that changed medicine for-
ever, consigning most previously fatal infections to history.” (Coghlan,
2016). I really hope this dream about the future of cancer and immuno-
therapy will come true. At this stage in 2018, however, first line treatment
by PD-1 blockade or in combination with CTLA-4 blockade is limited to
melanoma, lung cancer and renal cancer only. In the near future, I hope
many more types of cancer may be treated by immunotherapy as the first-
line therapy. I hope that by fine-tuning a therapeutic balance between
tumor growth and immune surveillance using PD-1 blockade, this devas-
tating disease may become instead of a death sentence, a chronic and
manageable condition. It might sometimes be preferable to merely control
or slow tumor growth, especially in more fragile, elderly patients, making
cancer a disease we live with, rather than die from. Looking back, vacci-
nation and antibiotic discoveries were two great leaps in human health-
care which greatly reduced infectious diseases. WHO has even declared
the human smallpox virus to be completely eradicated. I truly hope that
within this century the next leap forward will be controlling cancer by
immunotherapy and its improved protocols, which might include micro-
biome manipulation. We are still at a very early stage in our understand-
ing of the microbiome, metabolome, and all the other possible factors
affecting immunity and physiology, including the aging process. However,
as we have seen very rapid development of cancer immunotherapy during
last 10 years, I believe the future of cancer treatment is promising and
really hope that the 21st century will be remembered as the century in
which cancer was conquered.
    Neither infectious disease control nor cancer immunotherapy would
have been possible without acquired immunity, which developed at a very
early stage of the vertebrate evolution. Acquired immunity originated in
jawless fish, in which AID orthologues with a unique enzymatic ability
were responsible for generating the enormously diverse molecules for


356   THE NOBEL PRIZES




      Figure 21. Current colleagues and long-term collaborators.




      both the T and B lineage equivalents (Guo et al., 2009). Later, in jawed
      fish, a transposon containing ancestral RAG-1 and RAG-2 ‘jumped’ into a
      primordial immunoglobulin-like gene. The transposon insertion gener-
      ated a split gene, an ancestor of the V(D)J segments as well as recombi-
      nase enzymes. RAGs replaced the function of AID in the repertoire gener-
      ation, while AID kept its function for antigen-induced antibody memory
      including SHM and CSR. All these drastic genetic mechanisms were
      selected during evolution for the advantage they conferred in the fight
      against infectious pathogens. As a result, humans now benefit from the
      sophisticated acquired immune system in the fight against cancer. Cancer
      cells accumulate mutations and develop into non-self-cells expressing
      neoantigens that are easily recognized by the acquired immune system.
      This is obviously an extra bonus from acquired immunity that evolution
      did not anticipate. In that sense, we humans are very lucky to enjoy this
      unexpected gift from evolution.


      ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
      I would like to thank former collaborators, current lab members and
      many others in the laboratories of Fumihiko Matsuda and Sidonia Faga-
      rasan who contributed to all these studies (Fig. 21). I thank Sidonia Faga-
      rasan, Alexis Vogelzang, Blake Thompson, Maki Kobayashi and Kenji
      Chamoto for their help with the design and editing for the Nobel pres-
      entation and lecture. I also have an enormous number of outside collabo-


                                                                    Tasuku Honjo Lecture     357


rators, the following of whom collaborated with us on antibody diversity
and cancer immunotherapy: E. Severinson [Stockholm Univ.], F. Alt
[Harvard Univ.], M. Nussenzweig [Rockefeller Univ.], A. Fischer [Necker
Hospital], A. Durandy [Necker Hospital], T. Chiba [Kyoto Univ. Hospital],
G. Freeman [Dana Farber Cancer Center], N. Minato [Kyoto Univ.], S.
Fujii [Kyoto Univ.], I. Konishi [Kyoto Univ.]. I am very much obliged to my
devoted supporting staffs, without whom my achievements would have
been impossible. I would also like to acknowledge the many funding
agencies that supported my research for many years. Last but not least, I
would like to thank my family for their generous support.




references
Agata, Y., Kawasaki, A., Nishimura, H., Ishida, Y., Tsubata, T., Yagita, H., and Honjo,
   T. (1996). Expression of the PD-1 antigen on the surface of stimulated mouse T
   and B lymphocytes. International Immunology 8, 765–772.
Alexandrov, L. B., Nik-Zainal, S., Wedge, D. C., Aparicio, S. A., Behjati, S., Biankin,
   A. V., Bignell, G. R., Bolli, N., Borg, A., Borresen-Dale, A. L., et al. (2013). Signa-
   tures of mutational processes in human cancer. Nature 500, 415–421.
Ansell, S. M., Lesokhin, A. M., Borrello, I., Halwani, A., Scott, E. C., Gutierrez, M.,
   Schuster, S. J., Millenson, M. M., Cattry, D., Freeman, G. J., et al. (2015). PD-1
   blockade with nivolumab in relapsed or refractory Hodgkin's lymphoma. The
   New England Journal of Medicine 372, 311–319.
Apetoh, L., Ghiringhelli, F., Tesniere, A., Obeid, M., Ortiz, C., Criollo, A., Mignot,
   G., Maiuri, M. C., Ullrich, E., Saulnier, P., et al. (2007). Toll-like receptor
   4-dependent contribution of the immune system to anticancer chemotherapy
   and radiotherapy. Nature Medicine 13, 1050–1059.
Azuma, C., Tanabe, T., Konishi, M., Kinashi, T., Noma, T., Matsuda, F., Yaoita, Y.,
   Takatsu, K., Hammarström, L., Smith, C. I. E., et al. (1986). Cloning of cDNA for
   human T-cell replacing factor (interleukin-5) and comparison with the murine
   homologue. Nucleic Acids Research 14, 9149–9158.
Begum, N. A., Nagaoka, H., Kobayashi, M., and Honjo, T. (2015). Chapter 18 –
   Molecular Mechanisms of AID Function. In Molecular Biology of B Cells (Second
   Edition), F.W. Alt, T. Honjo, A. Radbruch, and M. Reth, eds. (London: Academic
   Press), pp. 305–344.
Brack, C., Hirama, M., Lenhard-Schuller, R., and Tonegawa, S. (1978). A complete
   immunoglobulin gene is created by somatic recombination. Cell 15, 1–14.
Brown, D. D., and Weber, C. S. (1968). Gene linkage by RNA-DNA hybridization: I.
   Unique DNA sequences homologous to 4 s RNA, 5 s RNA and ribosomal RNA.
   Journal of Molecular Biology 34, 661–680.
Brunet, J.-F., Denizot, F., Kuciani, M. F., Roux-Dosseto, M., Suzan, M., Mattei,
   M.-G., and Golstein, P. (1987). A new member of the immunoglobulin super-
   family – CTLA-4. Nature 328, 267–270.
Burnet, M. (1957). Cancer: a biological approach. III. Viruses associated with neo-
   plastic conditions. IV. Practical applications. British Medical Journal 1, 841–847.
Chamoto, K., Chowdhury, P. S., Kumar, A., Sonomura, K., Matsuda, F., Fagarasan,


358   THE NOBEL PRIZES


         S., and Honjo, T. (2017). Mitochondrial activation chemicals synergize with
         surface receptor PD-1 blockade for T cell-dependent antitumor activity. Pro-
         ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 114,
         E761–E770.
      Chowdhury, P. S., Chamoto, K., and Honjo, T. (2018). Combination therapy strate-
         gies for improving PD-1 blockade efficacy: a new era in cancer immunotherapy.
         Journal of Internal Medicine 283, 110–120.
      Coghlan, A. (2016). Closing in on Cancer. New Scientist 229, 34–37.
      Colwell, J. (2015). Is PD-L1 Expression a Biomarker of Response? Cancer Discovery
         5, 1232.
      Cory, S., Webb, E., Gough, J., Adams, J.M. (1981). Recombination events near the
         immunoglobulin Cmu gene join variable and constant region genes, switch
         heavy-chain expression, or inactivate the locus. Biochemistry 20, 2662–2671.
      Davis, M. M., Kim, S. K., and Hood, L. (1980). Immunoglobulin class switching:
         Developmentally regulated DNA rearrangements during differentiation. Cell 22,
         1–2.
      Edelman, G. M. (1959). Dissociation of γ-globulin. Journal of the American Chemi-
         cal Society 81, 3155–3156.
      Fagarasan, S., Muramatsu, M., Suzuki, K., Nagaoka, H., Hiai, H., and Honjo, T.
         (2002). Critical roles of activation-induced cytidine deaminase in the homeo-
         stasis of gut flora. Science 298, 1424–1427.
      Fox, C. J., Hammerman, P. S., and Thompson, C. B. (2005). Fuel feeds function:
         energy metabolism and the T-cell response. Nature Reviews. Immunology 5,
         844–852.
      Freeman, G. J., Long, A. J., Iwai, Y., Bourque, K., Chernova, T., Nishimura, H., Fitz,
         L. J., Malenkovich, N., Okazaki, T., Byrne, M. C., Horton, H. F., Fouser, L.,
         Carter, L., Ling, V., Bowman, M. R., Carreno, B. M., Collins, M., Wood, C. R. and
         Honjo, T. (2000). Engagement of the PD-1 immunoinhibitory receptor by a
         novel B7 family member leads to negative regulation of lymphocyte activation.
         Journal of Experimental Medicine 192, 1027–1034.
      Gong, J., Chehrazi-Raffle, A., Reddi, S., and Salgia, R. (2018). Development of PD-1
         and PD-L1 inhibitors as a form of cancer immunotherapy: a comprehensive
         review of registration trials and future considerations. Journal for Immunother-
         apy of Cancer 6, 8.
      Guo, P., Hirano, M., Herrin, B.R., Li, J., Yu, C., Sadlonova, A., Cooper, M.D. (2009)
         Dual nature of the adaptive immune system in lampreys. Nature 459, 796–801.
      Hamanishi, J., Mandai, M., Ikeda, T., Minami, M., Kawaguchi, A., Murayama, T.,
         Kanai, M., Mori, Y., Matsumoto, S., Chikuma, S., et al. (2015). Safety and Antitu-
         mor Activity of Anti-PD-1 Antibody, Nivolumab, in Patients with Platinum-Re-
         sistant Ovarian Cancer. Journal of Clinical Oncology: official journal of the
         American Society of Clinical Oncology 33, 4015–4022.
      Hilschmann, N., and Craig, L. C. (1965). Amino acid sequence studies with Bence-
         Jones proteins. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
         States of America 53, 1403–1409.
      Honjo, T., Packman, S., Swan, D., Nau, M., and Leder, P. (1974). Organization of
         immunoglobulin genes: reiteration frequency of the mouse kappa chain con-
         stant region gene. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
         States of America 71, 3659–3663.
      Honjo, T., and Kataoka, T. (1978). Organization of immunoglobulin heavy chain
         genes and allelic deletion model. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
         of the United States of America 75, 2140–2144.


                                                                Tasuku Honjo Lecture    359


Ishida, Y., Agata, Y., Shibahara, K., and Honjo, T. (1992). Induced expression of
   PD-1, a novel member of the immunoglobulin gene superfamily, upon pro-
   grammed cell death. The EMBO Journal 11, 3887–3895.
Iwai, Y., Ishida, M., Tanaka, Y., Okazaki, T., Honjo, T., and Minato, N. (2002).
   Involvement of PD-L1 on tumor cells in the escape from host immune system
   and tumor immunotherapy by PD-L1 blockade. Proceedings of the National
   Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 99, 12293–12297.
Iwai, Y., Terawaki, S., and Honjo, T. (2005). PD-1 blockade inhibits hematogenous
   spread of poorly immunogenic tumor cells by enhanced recruitment of effector
   T cells. International Immunology 17, 133–144.
Iwasato, T., Shimizu, A., Honjo, T., and Yamagishi, H. (1990). Circular DNA is
   excised by immunoglobulin class switch recombination. Cell 62, 143–149.
Kataoka, T., Kawakami, T., Takahashi, N., and Honjo, T. (1980). Rearrangement of
   immunoglobulin gamma 1-chain gene and mechanism for heavy-chain class
   switch. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
   America 77, 919–923.
Kataoka, T., Miyata, T., and Honjo, T. (1981). Repetitive sequences in class-switch
   recombination regions of immunoglobulin heavy chain genes. Cell 23, 357–368.
Kawamoto, S., Tran, T. H., Maruya, M., Suzuki, K., Doi, Y., Tsutsui, Y., Kato, L. M.,
   and Fagarasan, S. (2012). The inhibitory receptor PD-1 regulates IgA selection
   and bacterial composition in the gut. Science 336, 485–489.
Krummel, M. F., and Allison, J. P. (1995). CD28 and CTLA-4 have opposing effects
   on the response of T cells to stimulation. The Journal of Experimental Medicine
   182, 459–465.
Maki, R., Traunecker, A., Sakano, H., Roeder, W., and Tonegawa, S. (1980). Exon
   shuffling generates an immunoglobulin heavy chain gene. Proceedings of the
   National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 77, 2138–2142.
Martincorena, I., and Campbell, P. J. (2015). Somatic mutation in cancer and nor-
   mal cells. Science 349, 1483–1489.
Meng, F.-L., Alt, F. W., and Tian, M. (2015). Chapter 19 – The Mechanism of IgH
   Class Switch Recombination. In Molecular Biology of B Cells (Second Edition),
   F.W. Alt, T. Honjo, A. Radbruch, and M. Reth, eds. (London: Academic Press),
   pp. 345–362.
Miyajima, M., Zhang, B., Sugiura, Y., Sonomura, K., Guerrini, M. M., Tsutsui, Y.,
   Maruya, M., Vogelzang, A., Chamoto, K., Honda, K., et al. (2017). Metabolic
   shift induced by systemic activation of T cells in PD-1-deficient mice perturbs
   brain monoamines and emotional behavior. Nature Immunology 18, 1342–1352.
Muramatsu, M., Sankaranand, V. S., Anant, S., Sugai, M., Kinoshita, K., Davidson,
   N. O., and Honjo, T. (1999). Specific Expression of Activation-induced Cytidine
   Deaminase (AID), a Novel Member of the RNA-editing Deaminase Family in
   Germinal Center B Cells. Journal of Biological Chemistry 274, 18470–18476.
Muramatsu, M., Kinoshita, K., Fagarasan, S., Yamada, S., Shinkai, Y., and Honjo, T.
   (2000). Class Switch Recombination and Hypermutation Require Activa-
   tion-Induced Cytidine Deaminase (AID), a Potential RNA Editing Enzyme. Cell
   102, 553–563.
Nakamura, M., Kondo, S., Sugai, M., Nazarea, M., Imamura, S., and Honjo, T.
   (1996). High frequency class switching of an IgM+ B lymphoma clone CH12F3
   to IgA+ cells. International Immunology 8, 193–201.
Nishimura, H., Minato, N., Nakano. T., Honjo, T. (1998). Immunological studies on
   PD-1 deficient mice: implication of PD-1 as a negative regulator for B cell
   responses. International Immunology 10, 1563–72.


360   THE NOBEL PRIZES


      Nishimura, H., Nose, M., Hiai, H., Minato, N., and Honjo, T. (1999). Development
         of lupus-like autoimmune diseases by disruption of the PD-1 gene encoding an
         ITIM motif-carrying immunoreceptor. Immunity 11, 141–151.
      Nishimura, H., Okazaki, T., Tanaka, Y., Nakatani, K., Hara, M., Matsumori, A.,
         Sasayama, S., Mizoguchi, A., Hiai, H., Minato, N., and Honjo, T. (2001). Autoim-
         mune dilated cardiomyopathy in PD-1 receptor-deficient mice. Science 291,
         319–322.
      Noma, Y., Sideras, P., Naito, T., Bergstedt-Lindquist, S., Azuma, C., Severinson, E.,
         Tanabe, T., Kinashi, T., Matsuda, F., Yaoita, Y., and Honjo, T. (1986). Cloning of
         cDNA encoding the murine IgG1 induction factor by a novel strategy using SP6
         promoter. Nature 319, 640.
      Okazaki, T., Maeda, A., Nishimura, H., Kurosaki, T., and Honjo, T. (2001). PD-1
         immunoreceptor inhibits B cell receptor-mediated signaling by recruiting src
         homology 2-domain-containing tyrosine phosphatase 2 to phosphotyrosine.
         Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
         98, 13866–13871.
      Ono, M., Kondo, T., Kawakami, M., and Honjo, T. (1977). Purification of Immuno-
         globulin Heavy Chain Messenger RNA by Immunoprecipitation from the Mouse
         Myeloma Tumor, MOPC-31C. The Journal of Biochemistry 81, 949–954.
      Porter, R. R. (1959). The hydrolysis of rabbit γ-globulin and antibodies with crys-
         talline papain. Biochemical Journal 73, 119–127.
      Putnam, F. W., and Easley, C. W. (1965). Structural Studies of the Immunoglobu-
         lins: I. THE TRYPTIC PEPTIDES OF BENCE-JONES PROTEINS Journal of
         Biological Chemistry 240, 1626–1638.
      Rabbitts, T. H., Forster, A., and Milstein, C. P. (1981). Human immunoglobulin
         heavy chain genes: evolutionary comparisons of Cμ, Cδ and Cγ genes and asso-
         ciated switch sequences. Nucleic Acids Research 9, 4509–4524.
      Revy, P., Muto, T., Levy, Y., Geissmann, F., Plebani, A., Sanal, O., Catalan, N., For-
         veille, M., Dufourcq-Lagelouse, R., Gennery, A., et al. (2000). Activation-In-
         duced Cytidine Deaminase (AID) Deficiency Causes the Autosomal Recessive
         Form of the Hyper-IgM Syndrome (HIGM2). Cell 102, 565–575.
      Robert, C., Long, G. V., Brady, B., Dutriaux, C., Maio, M., Mortier, L., Hassel, J. C.,
         Rutkowski, P., McNeil, C., Kalinka-Warzocha, E., et al. (2015). Nivolumab in
         previously untreated melanoma without BRAF mutation. The New England
         Journal of Medicine 372, 320–330.
      Shimizu, A., Takahashi, N., Yaoita, Y., and Honjo, T. (1982). Organization of the
         constant-region gene family of the mouse immunoglobulin heavy chain. Cell 28,
         499–506.
      Sivan, A., Corrales, L., Hubert, N., Williams, J. B., Aquino-Michaels, K., Earley, Z.
         M., Benyamin, F. W., Lei, Y. M., Jabri, B., Alegre, M. L., et al. (2015). Commensal
         Bifidobacterium promotes antitumor immunity and facilitates anti-PD-L1 effi-
         cacy. Science 350, 1084–1089.
      Suzuki, K., Meek, B., Doi, Y., Muramatsu, M., Chiba, T., Honjo, T., and Fagarasan,
         S. (2004). Aberrant expansion of segmented filamentous bacteria in IgA-defi-
         cient gut. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
         America 101, 1981–1986.
      Takeshima, T., Chamoto, K., Wakita, D., Ohkuri, T., Togashi, Y., Shirato, H., Kita-
         mura, H., and Nishimura, T. (2010). Local radiation therapy inhibits tumor
         growth through the generation of tumor-specific CTL: its potentiation by com-
         bination with Th1 cell therapy. Cancer Research 70, 2697–2706.
      Tang, J., Shalabi, A., and Hubbard-Lucey, V. M. (2018). Comprehensive analysis of


                                                                 Tasuku Honjo Lecture    361


   the clinical immuno-oncology landscape. Annals of Oncology: official journal of
   the European Society for Medical Oncology 29, 84–91.
Titani, K., Whitley, E. Jr., Avogardo, L., Putnam, F.W. (1965). Immunoglobulin
   Structure: Partial Amino Acid Sequence of a Bence Jones Protein. Science 149,
   1090–1092.
Tivol, E. A., Borriello, F., Schweitzer, A. N., Lynch, W. P., Bluestone, J. A., and
   Sharpe, A. H. (1995). Loss of CTLA-4 leads to massive lymphoproliferation and
   fatal multiorgan tissue destruction, revealing a critical negative regulatory role
   of CTLA-4. Immunity 3, 541–547.
Topalian, S. L., Hodi, F. S., Brahmer, J. R., Gettinger, S. N., Smith, D. C., McDer-
   mott, D. F., Powderly, J. D., Carvajal, R. D., Sosman, J. A., Atkins, M. B., et al.
   (2012). Safety, activity, and immune correlates of anti-PD-1 antibody in cancer.
   The New England Journal of Medicine 366, 2443–2454.
Ventura-Clapier, R., Garnier, A., and Veksler, V. (2008). Transcriptional control of
   mitochondrial biogenesis: the central role of PGC-1alpha. Cardiovascular
   Research 79, 208–217.
Walunas, T. L., Lenschow, D. J., Bakker, C. Y., Linsley, P. S., Freeman, G. J., Green,
   J. M., Thompson, C. B., and Bluestone, J. A. (1994). CTLA-4 can function as a
   negative regulator of T cell activation. Immunity 1, 405–413.
Wang, J., Yoshida, T., Nakaki, F., Hiai, H., Okazaki, T., and Honjo, T. (2005). Estab-
   lishment of NOD-Pdcd1-/- mice as an efficient animal model of type I diabetes.
   Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
   102, 11823–11828.
Wang, J., Okazaki, I. M., Yoshida, T., Chikuma, S., Kato, Y., Nakaki, F., Hiai, H.,
   Honjo, T., and Okazaki, T. (2010). PD-1 deficiency results in the development of
   fatal myocarditis in MRL mice. International Immunology 22, 443–452.
Waterhouse, P., Penninger, J. M., Timms, E., Wakeham, A., Shahinian, A., Lee, K.
   P., Thompson, C. B., Griesser, H., and Mak, T. W. (1995). Lymphoproliferative
   disorders with early lethality in mice deficient in Ctla-4. Science 270, 985–988.
