          JO   H N   F . EN   D E R S,   FR E D E R I C K C . RO B B I N S ,
                          T H O M A S H . WE L L E R


     The cultivation of the poliomyelitis viruses in
                     tissue culture
                        Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1954


In this lecture it is our purpose to recall our principal observations on the
behavior of poliomyelitis viruses in tissue culture and the manner in which
they were made. To do this seems appropriate, since it is for them we have
jointly been awarded the highest of honors in our field - the Nobel Prize in
Physiology or Medicine. But before we begin we earnestly desire to point
 out that the results of our research are not alone the product of our triple
 thought and effort. As nearly always in the undertaking of science many
 others who have worked with us have contributed of their minds and labor.
 And so we would think of them as here with us now, sharing in these great
happenings.



           Antecedents to the Investigation of Poliomyelitis Virus

As observed long ago by Claude Bernard the history of many discoveries in
the more exact sciences may be clearly and tersely told because such discov-
eries depend upon ideas logically derived from well-established general prin-
ciples or theories. Such ideas give rise to a series of deductions the validity of
which must, of course, be then experimentally corroborated. Biology in-
cluding medicine has long sought to range itself with physics and chemistry
by defining general principles that govern the reactions of living organisms.
Within certain areas such as genetics and biochemistry much progress has
been made toward these ultimate goals. In other biological disciplines, how-
ever, as in our own of viruses and viral diseases the situation in certain respects
does not differ too greatly from that of the state of medicine in the time of
Bernard. Medicine he described as a science in its infancy where complex
and obscure questions were still to be studied and where experimental ideas
did not always emerge from the rather vague conceptions then current.
Under these circumstances, he wrote, "physiologists should not be afraid to


            CULTIVATION        OF   POLIOMYELITIS         VIRUSES            449
act somewhat at random, so as to try - permit me the common expression -
fishing in troubled waters. This amounts to saying that, in the midst of the
functional disturbances which they produce, they may hope to see some un-
expected phenomena emerge which may give direction to their research".
   In our own studies we did not depend entirely upon fishing in troubled
waters, but that we profitably indulged at one point in this sport cannot be
denied. Indeed, as so often in the realm of experimental medicine, many of
the antecedent conditions which finally focused our investigations upon the
specific problem of the growth in vitro of poliomyelitis virus in extraneural
cells would have been quite indefinable a priori. It may, therefore, be per-
tinent to recall at this time some of the factors which led to these observations.
   In 1937 Dr. Enders working in the Department of Bacteriology and Im-
munology at the Harvard Medical School turned from the study of bacterial
immunity to an investigation of the growth of herpes simplex virus. Expe-
rience with the herpes virus served to establish an enduring preoccupation
with pathogens of this class and was followed by attempts to isolate the agent
of measles. In these experiments the tissue-culture method was employed
with uncertain results. But the conviction was gained that it represented a
basic tool for the study of viruses of which the possible applications were
 almost unlimited. For this as well as other reasons the roller-tube method
 used about this time by Gey and Bang for the cultivation of the virus of
 lymphogranuloma venereum was selected as an ideal means of investigating
 over a prolonged period the relationships between a virus and its host cells.
 One of the participants in this research in which the agent of vaccinia was
 employed was Thomas Weller 1. Dr. Weller, then a fourth-year medical
 student at Harvard, joined the group primarily because of his concern with
 the larger parasites of man. He wished to determine whether one of these,
 Trichinella spiralis, could be made to pass through its developmental cycle in
 the presence of living tissue cells. While carrying out these studies he also
 acquired an interest in the viruses.
    These preliminary explorations of the value of the tissue-culture method
 were interrupted by the War, although by 1941 further observations stim-
 ulating to us had been made at the Harvard Medical School on the behavior
 in roller-tube cultures of the viruses of equine encephalomyelitis, herpes
 simplex, and influenza virus, and on that of varicella independently by Dr.
 Weller and Dr. L. C. Kingsland, Jr., at the Children’s Hospital in Boston.
    After the war Dr. Enders was asked to establish a laboratory for research in
 infectious diseases at the Children’s Hospital. Dr. Weller participated in the


450             1954 J.F.ENDERS, F.C.ROBBINS, T.H.WELLER

establishment of the laboratory and we were soon joined by Dr. Robbins
who had recently returned from duty in Italy where under his direction an
epidemiologic study of a disease resembling Q fever had resulted in the
identification of the responsible rickettsia for the first time in that country.
Under these circumstances congenial to the free implementation of our in-
terests the first experiments in the new laboratory were begun in April 1947.
    Investigation of the potentialities of tissue culture for the propagation of
viruses was naturally resumed and for this purpose the agent of mumps was
first selected, since recent observations had provided the essential techniques
whereby it could be easily studied in the laboratory. It was soon demon-
strated that growth readily occurred in a simple suspended cell culture
consisting of fragments of chick amniotic membrane nourished with a bal-
anced salt solution and ox serum ultrafiltrate2. Viral increase was easily fol-
lowed by measuring the amount of hemagglutinin that emerged in the cul-
ture fluid after inoculation of small quantities of the agent. A modification
of the usual technique for handling such cultures was introduced that per-
mitted the demonstration of the slow-growing mumps virus. Instead of
 transferring material from one culture to another after an interval of three
 or four days as had been the procedure of most previous investigators, the
 tissues were preserved while the nutritive medium was removed and replen-
ished at frequent intervals. In this way viability of the cells could be main-
 tained for 30 days or longer and full opportunity allowed for viral growth to
 occur while a substantial dilution of the original viral inoculum was effected.
    In 1948 when this work was completed we had no immediate intention of
 carrying out experiments with poliomyelitis viruses. Nevertheless from
 time to time we had considered the mounting evidence which had been well
 summarized by Green and Evans in favor of the possibility that these agents
 might not be strict neurotropes. Thus, for us, along with others it was be-
coming increasingly difficult to visualize the nervous system - as site of manu-
facture of the enormous quantities of virus that was found in the feces of
 many patients. Such ideas were in our minds when the decision was taken
 to use a mixture of human embryonic skin and muscle tissue in suspended
 cell cultures in the hope that the virus of varicella might multiply in the cells
 of its natural host. In this way such cultures were made available while close
 at hand in the storage cabinet was the Lansing strain of poliomyelitis virus.
 Thereupon it suddenly occurred to us that everything had been prepared
 almost without conscious effort on our part for a new attempt to cultivate
 the agent in extraneural tissue.


            CULTIVATION        OF   POLIOMYELITIS         VIRUSES           451
Demonstration of Multiplication of Poliomyelitis Viruses in Cells of Extra-
                                neural Tissues

Accordingly the virus in the form of an infected suspension of mouse brain
was introduced into several of these cultures of human tissue which were
then handled exactly as in the experiments with the mumps agent. By inoc-
ulation of mice with the fluids removed from the original cultures as well as
with those taken from subsequent serial passages in vitro it soon became
apparent that multiplication of the virus regularly occurred. Introduction of
fluid from the third passage into the brains of monkeys was followed by the
appearance of typical flaccid paralysis of the legs3. These findings, surprising
as they were in the light of the failure of our predecessors to propagate the
virus in extraneural tissue, left no doubt in our minds that this could be
accomplished.
    The increase in the Lansing virus content of tissue cultures of this sort is
illustrated in Fig. 1. These results were obtained by titrating at intervals of
four days the pooled fluids removed from four cultures all of which were
 inoculated with the same quantity of infected mouse brain. The upper curve
represents the negative logarithm of the mouse titers, the lower the cal-
 culated amounts of virus, expressed as LD50/ml for mice, that emerged in the
 fluid phase during each interval of four days. It is evident that under these
 conditions significant quantities of virus appear only after a period of eight
 days and that the maximal yield is obtained between the 12th and 16th days.
 These findings were soon confirmed and extended: (a) by continued serial
 passage in human embryonic skin and muscle tissue of this as well as another
strain of Lansing virus; (b) by the successful propagation of representatives
of Types I and III viruses4,5; and (c) by identification of the agents grown in
tissue culture in virus neutralization tests.
    Since the tissue employed in these experiments was removed from the
 extremities it was considered to be free of intact nerve cells. It was concluded,
 therefore, that growth of poliomyelitis virus in cultures of this material
occurred in cells of extraneural origin. This conclusion has been amply sup-
ported by direct observations of the effect of the viruses on various types of
cells which we will mention hereafter as well as the later demonstration by
 Scherer and Syverton of multiplication in presumably pure lines of fibro-
blasts and cells of epithelial origin. It has been made evident, then, that in
vitro at least poliomyelitis viruses are not strict neurotropes.
    During this earlier period of research, growth of representative strains of


452           1954 J.F.ENDERS, F.C.ROBBINS, T.H.WELLER




                              At time of



                                                                  ,



Fig. 1. Mouse infectivity of pools of fluids removed at four-day intervals from sus-
pended cell cultures of human embryonic skin-muscle tissue inoculated with Lansing
               mouse-brain virus. (From J. Immunol., 69 (1952) 652.)


virus was demonstrated in a variety of other human embryonic tissues in
                          6
suspended cell cultures . These included intestine, liver, kidney, adrenal,
brain, heart, spleen, and lung. Multiplication also occurred in postnatal renal
                                                                                    7
and preputial tissue. In confirmation of the results of Sabin and Olitsky
reported in 1936 growth of virus was also obtained in cultures of human
                                                                           8
embryonic brain. Later when we applied the roller-tube technique               to the
cultivation of these agents, for reasons that will be indicated shortly, it was
found that viral increase occurred more rapidly and tended to reach some-
what higher maxima when compared with those in Fig. 1. The curves in
Fig. 2 illustrate these differences. The data included in Fig. 2 were obtained
by titration in mice, of fluids removed successively from roller-tube cultures
of human embryonic skin and muscle tissue inoculated with Lansing virus.
It is worthy of remark that the highest concentrations of virus attained in the


              C U L T I V A T I O N   O F   P O L I O M Y E L I T I S   V I R U S E S   453




Fig. 2. Multiplication   of   Lansing virus in roller-tube cultures of human embryonic
skin-muscle tissue inoculated at two intervals after preparation. Mouse infectivity titers
           of pools of fluids removed at various intervals after inoculation.
                           (From J. Immunnol., 69 (1952) 689.)


tissue-culture fluid are equivalent to or exceed those encountered in the nerv-
ous system of the infected mouse.




The results we have just described appeared to be of basic significance since
they left no doubt that the three known antigenic types of poliomyelitis
viruses could be grown without difficulty apparently in a wide variety of
human cells. Their ultimate value, however, in the future study of these
agents both from the biologic and practical points of view would have been
greatly limited had phenomena not been discovered which clearly and ac-
curately indicate the occurrence of viral multiplication within the tissue-
culture system itself. Thus it is probable that if it had remained necessary to
inoculate experimental animals in order to demonstrate virus in the culture,
the method would have been largely utilized as a convenient means for the
preparation of virus suspensions.
   Fortunately, signs of viral activity in the cultures themselves were observ-
ed soon after it was established that multiplication took place. Examination
of stained sections of fragments of human embryonic intestine and skin and
muscle removed from the early suspended cell subcultures of the Lansing
strain revealed widespread cellular degeneration. In contrast, uninoculated


454              1954 J.F.ENDERS, F.C.ROBBINS, T.H.WELLER


tissues maintained under the same conditions were found to contain many
cells in apparently excellent condition. S u b s e q u e n t s t u d y o f t h e e f f e c t o f
Type I and Type II viruses in this tissue as well as in cultures of embryonic
intestine and brain convinced us that after a prolonged period (16 to 32 days),
growth of virus resulted in cell death and disintegration. Fibroblastic and
epithelial cells at least were affected by the virus.
   At about the same time these cytopathogenic effects of the virus, as we
later called them, were observed, we perceived an indirect manifestation of
cell injury. It consisted of an accelareted decline in the metabolic rate of
tissues infected with virus as expressed by a progressive reduction of acid
formations. This phenomenon was demonstrated in a simple manner by
comparing at intervals the pH of the medium in inoculated cultures with




* The virus consisted of a suspension of infected mouse brain. Three cultures were each
inoculated with 0.1 cc of each dilution.
* * Average of individual pH readings of the medium in three flasks. Supernatant fluids
were removed and fresh medium added on the days indicated. Readings were made just
before this was done. The pH of the fresh medium varies from about 7.7-7.5.

Fig. 3. Determinations of the pH of the fluid phase of flask cultures of human embryon-
      ic brain inoculated with Lansing virus. (From Proc. Soc. Exptl. Biol. Med.,



that in control cultures containing no virus. Experiment showed that a sat-
isfactory correlation usually existed between a high pH and the presence of
virus in the culture fluid. With the establishment of this correlation it be-
came possible to apply the phenomenon to the titration of the infectivity for
the tissue culture of a given suspension of virus just as one employs a series
of susceptible animals for the same purpose. In Fig. 3 the results obtained in
the titration of Lansing virus grown in tissue culture are presented as an
example of how this indirect manifestation of viral cytopathogenicity can be


                C U L T I V A T I O N   O F   P O L I O M Y E L I T I S   V I R U S E S            455

invoked to determine the smallest quantity of the agent capable of mul-
tiplying in suspended cell cultures of human embryonic brain fragments. It
                                                                                  4
is evident that in this instance the material could be diluted 10                     times and still
inhibit cell metabolism. Subsequently Rhodes and his associates showed that
reduced acid production was correlated with a progressive decrease in glu-
cose utilization.
  These indices of viral multiplication in suspended cell cultures, useful as
they were in our earlier investigations, proved inconvenient in two respects.
The direct observation of cell injury required the fixation, sectioning and
staining of the fragments - a laborious process, while the difference in pH
required the lapse of about two weeks or longer before it became evident.
Accordingly, other means were sought by which viral cytopathogenicity
might     be   conveniently   and   rapidly     demonstrated.      At     first   we    explored   the
method of explantation which had been used in the past by other workers,
in particular Huang, to test the effect of viruses on cell viability. This consists
in placing the fragment taken from a suspended cell culture in a drop of
clotted chicken plasma and observing whether or not cell outgrowth occurs
upon subsequent incubation. Results of experiments with poliomyelitis virus
carried out in this manner were unequivocal. When infected fragments were
removed eight days or longer after infection and explanted, cell growth
failed to occur, or if it did begin, soon ceased to progress and was followed
by rapid degeneration. In the control preparations the growth of cells pro-
ceeded in a normal manner. It was also determined by this means that the
addition of type-specific antiserum to the suspended cell culture before the
virus was introduced protected the cells from the destructive effect of the
latter.
  These observations appeared to be important from several points of view.
In the first place it was made evident that the cytopathogenic effect of the
virus could be directly and easily observed in the untreated culture. Thus
another and more direct criterion of viral multiplication was made available
and an easier method of assaying infectivity was foreshadowed. The dem-
onstration of the inhibitory effect of homologous antiserum not only afford-
ed convincing evidence that the cytopathic changes observed were caused
by the virus but also indicated that it would be possible to determine in vitro
the antigenic type of poliomyelitis viruses, as well as the presence of type-
specific antibody in human and animal sera.
   The explant procedure, however, was still rather cumbersome and a con-
siderable lapse of time was required before results could be obtained. Could


 456            1954 J.F.ENDERS, F.C.ROBBINS, T.H.WELLER




                   A                                             B

Fig. 4. Preparations from roller-tube cultures of human embryonic skin-muscle tissue.
(A) Control uninoculated culture. (B) Culture three days after inoculation with Type I
               virus (Brunhilde strain). (Hematoxylin and eosin stain.)


 not the same phenomena, we inquired, be elicited more simply and more
 rapidly in roller-tube cultures which we knew provided large sheets of prolif-
 erating cells? Accordingly viruses representing the three types were inoc-
 ulated in roller-tube cultures of human embryonic skin and muscle. Within
 three to five days, degenerative changes were evident which thereafter in-
 volved the entire cell population. The inclusion of type specific antiserum
 in the system exhibited the same inhibitory effect as in the explant exper-
 iments. The cytopathogenic properties of Type I virus (Brunhilde strain)
 in roller-tube cultures of human embryonic fibroblastic-like cells are shown
 in Fig.4 (A and B). Because of the speed with which these changes develop
 and the readiness with which they may be observed the roller-tube technique
 was used in most of our subsequent investigations.




 We next investigated whether these basic phenomena, i.e., growth of virus
 and its cytopathogenic activity in vitro, might be employed in various proce-
 dures which hitherto could only be carried out through the use of large


                 C U L T I V A T I O N O F P O L I O M Y E L I T I S V I R U S E S   457

numbers of experimental animals. This objective seemed desirable since the
only hosts then known to be susceptible to infection with Types I and III
viruses were certain of the primates.
  We have already indicated how the cytopathic changes induced by the
poliomyelitis virus can be applied to the quantitative determination of viral
infectivity. Additional experiments quickly made it clear that by inoculating
roller-tube cultures with increasing dilutions of a suspension of virus, it was
possible to define a minimal infecting dose. This dose is now usually ex-
pressed as that quantity of a viral suspension which will induce cytopathic
changes in one-half the cultures to which it is added. ‘With the definition of
an infective dose of virus, it became feasible to measure the neutralizing
capacity of poliomyelitis antisera by determining the least amount of a serum
that will prevent the cytopathogenic activity of a known quality of virus.
Although we had carried out such experiments the first published results of
the titration of neutralizing antibodies were presented by Melnick and his
            10                                      11
co-worker        and Salk and his associates .
  The isolation and typing of poliomyelitis viruses from man has been in the
past a laborious and time-consuming procedure since it depended upon the
intracerebral inoculation of monkeys. Therefore, we sought to determine
whether these agents might not be recovered from feces or suspensions of the
spinal cord. It was soon learned that through the addition of the antibiotics
streptomycin and penicillin followed by centrifugation contaminating bacte-
ria and other micro-organisms could be suppressed. Materials treated in this
manner were at first added to suspended cell cultures of human embryonic
                                                         1 2
skin and muscle or postnatal human kidney . The presence of a cytopatho-
genie agent was revealed by differences in pH that occurred in these cultures
as compared with controls. Subsequently the antigenic type of the agent thus
isolated was determined by the explant method or in roller-tube cultures
using mixtures of the virus and antisera for the three known types. After
these original isolations were made, however, roller-tube cultures were
adopted as routine for isolation as well as typing of the virus since the proce-
dure is less complicated and results are obtained more rapidly. Indeed when
large amounts of virus are present it has been possible by simultaneously
carrying out both steps in this system to demonstrate poliomyelitis virus in
the feces within 48 hours.
  At this point it seems appropriate to remark that the discovery of the anti-
biotics has, as in so many other areas, worked a revolution in the field of
tissue culture. Through the use of these substances it is now not only possible


458           1954 J.F.ENDERS, F.C.ROBBINS, T.H.WELLER


to apply tissue cultures to the routine isolation of viruses from materials
heavily contaminated with micro-organisms, but it has become feasible to
use them under conditions and in numbers which in the past would have
been quite unthinkable. Here then we have another example of how one
discovery leads to many others often of quite a different nature.
  The need of a serological test for poliomyelitis which could be more easily
carried out than the test for virus-neutralizing antibody has long been felt.
Various workers, therefore, had attempted to prepare satisfactory antigens
from infected nervous tissue suitable for use in a complement fixation test.
This objective was not attained, however, until Casals and Olitsky in 1951
adapted Type II virus to suckling mice and showed that the brains of these
animals contained antigen in sufficient concentration to fix complement with
poliomyelitis antisera. Since the tissue culture had just been shown to pro-
vide a convenient means of producing large quantities of virus of all three
antigenic types in a menstruum relatively free of tissue contaminants, we
decided to see whether the virus-containing fluids might not be used as
complement fixing antigens. The exploration of this problem was chiefly
carried out by Dr. Arne Svedmyr of Stockholm who had come to our labor-
atory in 1951. Fluids were concentrated by a simple method of ultrafiltration
and employed as antigens in complement fixation tests, first with type-
specific antisera prepared in monkeys and then with sera from patients with
poliomyelitis. In both instances the capacity of the concentrated virus sus-
pensions to fix complement in the presence of poliomyelitis antibodies was
               13,14
demonstrated           . With the monkey sera the reactions were clearly type
specific in character. In contrast human sera often reacted with all three types
of antigen although they were known to contain neutralizing antibody specif-
ic for only a single type. This tendency of certain human sera to react in this
broad manner at present limits the usefulness of the complement fixation test
as a diagnostic measure.
  Investigations by numerous workers in the past had shown that polio-
myelitis virus derived from infected nervous tissues when inoculated by a
peripheral route might induce resistance to subsequent infection via the nerv-
ous system. The virus suspensions used in this way contained of necessity
large amounts of nervous tissue derivatives. Because of the absence of such
materials in the infected fluids of tissue cultures it early became of interest
to determine whether they might act as immunizing agents. Accordingly,
 fluids from suspended cell cultures of human embryonic skin and muscle
infected with the Lansing strain were inoculated intraperitoneally into mice.


               C U L T I V A T I O N   O F   P O L I O M Y E L I T I S   V I R U S E S   459

  Three weeks later the mice were injected intracerebrally with from 10 to
  5 0 L D50 doses of the homologous virus. In repeated experiments about one-
  half of the animals remained well whereas the mortality rate in the controls
  varied from 90 to 100 per cent. We concluded on the basis of these findings
  that virus propagated in tissue culture was capable of inducing immunity. A
  similar prophylactic effect resulting from peripheral inoculation of polio-
  myelitis tissue-culture virus was described a little before this time by Milzer
                         15
  and his co-workers .
    The possibility that tissue-culture virus in some form might eventually
  prove of value as a prophylactic agent naturally occurred to us when we first
  became convinced that the agent could be grown in extraneural tissues. We,
  therefore, were prepared to observe any indications of changes in patho-
  genicity for animals that might follow during serial passages. It was indeed
  not long before we observed that the mouse virulence of the Lansing strain
  which had been passed three times in suspended cell cultures of skin and
  muscle had markedly decreased. Although this loss might have been occa-
  sioned by a reduced capacity to multiply in vitro, it was soon shown that this
  was not the case, since the titer of viral infectivity as determined by the
tissue-culture method remained unchanged. Similar experiments with a
  Type I virus (Brunhilde strain) indicated that between the 2nd and 10th
  passages its pathogenicity for rhesus monkeys had diminished significantly.
  Subsequent passages in roller-tube cultures rapidly led to a further decrease in
  the capacity of the agent to produce paralysis in monkeys following intra-
  cerebral inoculation. The data recorded in those experiments are summarized
  in Fig. 5. The total decline in virulence was calculated to be of the order of




  * Usual   titer of infected monkey cord as obtained by various workers.

  Fig. 5. Results of titrations in monkeys and in tissue cultures of materials from a tissue
                       culture line of Type I virus (Brunhilde strain).


460                   1954 J.F.ENDERS, F.C.ROBBINS,T .H.WELLER


100,000 to 1,000,000 fold, since again no change had occurred during these
passages in the titer of the virus as determined in tissue culture. It is worthy
of note that in these experiments in which the final drop in monkey patho-
genicity occurred, the roller-tube cultures were inoculated with the smallest
amount of virus capable of inducing cytopathic changes.
  From these observations we concluded that, as with other viral agents, the
virulence of poliomyelitis virus is not a fixed attribute but on the contrary
may readily be altered under appropriate conditions.




The appearance in 1950 of reports by Milzer and co-workers and by Smith
                 16
and associates        confirmed our observations on the capacity of the polio-
myelitis viruses to multiply in vitro in human tissues of non-nervous origin.
These papers proved to be the forerunners of a number of significant contri-
butions from other laboratories in the United States that rapidly introduced
procedural modifications extending the general usefulness of the method.
Here specific reference may be made to only a few of these reports; how-
ever, particular mention should be made of the contributions of Evans and
his associates in Seattle, of the group working under Paul and Melnick at
New Haven, of Li and Schaeffer at Montgomery, of Sabin in Cincinnati, of
Salk and Youngner in Pittsburgh, and of Syverton and Scherer in Minneap-
olis. It is to be stressed, however, that at present tissue-culture methodology
as applied to research on poliomyelitis continues to undergo rapid changes.
   Prior to 1950, poliomyelitis research was of necessity concentrated in rela-
tively few centers that possessed facilities for handling large numbers of
monkeys. Following the demonstration that multiplication of poliomyelitis
                                                                               17,18
viruses could be accomplished in vitro i n m o n k e y - t e s t i c u l a r           and in mon-
                        19
key-kidney tissues , it was a natural development for those groups working
in these centers to concern themselves with the practical application of meth-
ods utilizing monkey tissues. Meanwhile other groups devoted much effort
toward establishing strains of standardized cells of human origin and to the
investigation of their potentialities in the study of the poliomyelitis viruses.
                                 20
Scherer, Syverton and Gey introduced the use of the HeLa strain of human
cells originally isolated from an epidermoid carcinoma of the cervix. Swim
and Parker, among others, maintained lines of normal cells in continuous
culture, and demonstrated the susceptibility of cells so cultivated to the cyto-


                C U L T I V A T I O N    O F   P O L I O M Y E L I T I S    V I R U S E S             461

pathic action of the poliomyelitis viruses. Concurrently, for certain objec-
tives, simplified methods of preparing cultures were introduced, such as the
planting of tissues on the wall of small tubes, that were subsequently slanted
during incubation. Considerable effort has been expended on the devel-
opment of synthetic media with the objectives of achieving standardization,
of eliminating viral inhibitory substances, and in particular, for the purposes
of preparing materials for immunization, of eliminating extraneous antigenic
substances. Most widely used has been the synthetic-tissue culture medium,
known as 199, developed by Morgan, Morton and Parker. We will now
describe certain of the more interesting and important applications of the
method.




Dulbecco and Vogt21 in a series of ingenious experiments have devised meth-
ods to obtain in vitro isolated plaques of cellular degeneration analogous to
those produced by bacteriophage and have presented evidence indicating that
each plaque represents the effect of a single infective unit of virus. According
to their procedure cell suspensions are prepared by exposing tissues to trypsin.
Kidney cells obtained in this manner when planted in flat dishes, yield homo-
geneous sheets of growth. After inoculation, the cells are covered with a thin
layer of agar, thus limiting the spread of the cytopathogenic virus. This tech-
nique provides a new method for the more accurate assay of viral activity. Of
greater importance is the means it offers of establishing clones of virus in con-
nection with the search for variants possessing altered pathogenic properties.
   On theoretical grounds, the desirable immunizing agent of the future for
poliomyelitis may well contain live stable avirulent variants of each of the
three main antigenic types of virus. It has already been noted that variations
i n v i r u l e n c e m a y a c c o m p a n y p r o l o n g e d p r o p a g a t i o n in vitro, and that the
selection of populations with altered characteristics may be expedited by the
utilization of the limiting dilution inoculation technique. Investigation along
                                                          22
these lines is being carried out by Sabin . E m p l o y i n g m a s s i v e i n o c u l a a n d
passage at 24 hour intervals, together with final passage at the dilution end-
point, strains have been developed from all three types that exhibit almost
complete loss of virulence on inoculation into primates. It would thus appear
 that the development of immunizing materials against poliomyelitis, com-
parable to the live avirulent strain of yellow-fever virus, through the use of
in vitro techniques is already more than a theoretical possibility.


462            1954   J.F.ENDERS,    F.C.ROBBINS,           T.H.WELLER


Development of immunizing materials employing inactivated poliomyelitis viruses
                          prepared by in vitro methods

In 1953, Salk and his co-workers reported experiments on active immuniza-
tion in human subjects employing a polyvalent vaccine containing virus
 treated with formalin. A striking antibody response followed the subcuta-
                                              19,23
neous inoculation of three doses of vaccine           . A large-scale field evaluation
trial of the vaccine was sponsored by the National Foundation for Infantile
Paralysis and is now in progress. Under the direction of Dr. Thomas Francis,
Jr., the Evaluation Center is maintaining records on 1,800,000 children; of
these 440,000 have received three injections of the Salk vaccine and 210,000
injections with a placebo. The study also includes a group of 20,000 children
in Finland. Analysis will be made of the antibody responses in a significant
number of those in the study group, as well as intensive laboratory investiga-
 tion of all cases of poliomyelitis or suspected poliomyelitis in the population
under study. To accomplish the large volume of work involved additional
                                                                                     24
 procedural modifications have been developed. Salk, Youngner and Ward
 have recently described a test based upon differences in pH for titration of
 virus as well as for antibody assay, wherein a cellular substrate of trypsinized
monkey kidney cells is employed.
   A somewhat different approach to the problem of immunization has been
                                                                          25
 carried out concurrently by Milzer, Levinson and associates w h o h a v e
 developed a trivalent tissue culture vaccine inactivated by ultraviolet irradia-
tion. Injection of this material into human volunteers has been followed in
most instances by a significant increase in antibody.




 As we have indicated the tissue culture offers two techniques for the diagno-
 sis of suspected cases of poliomyelitis; isolation of virus may be accomplished,
 or increase in specific antibody may be demonstrated. In the brief period
 since these procedures were first described, many reports have accumulated
 concerning the isolation of viruses by this technique. For example, in the
 United States Syverton, Scherer and Elwood recorded the isolation of 300
strains from patients with a clinical diagnosis of poliomyelitis. Here in Stock-
holm a series of isolations have been accomplished by Gard and Johnson,
 Svedmyr and Kjellen, and by Wesslen. Elsewhere throughout the world
 these techniques are being applied, as revealed by the reports of Goffe and


              C U L T I V A T I O N   O F   P O L I O M Y E L I T I S   V I R U S E S   463

Le Bouvier, Lepine and Barski, Monaci von Magnus, Gear and Malherbe,
Lahelle, Bazeley, and Kitaoka. Information is, therefore, becoming available
for the first time concerning the distribution of the three types of virus
throughout the world. Serological tests based on the tissue-culture method
are now also beginning to be used as diagnostic aids.




Since the introduction of these simple techniques it has become feasible for
the epidemiologist to study, with the assistance of the laboratory, the spread
of poliomyelitis in populations. Two recent developments in this field de-
                                                                  26
serve particular comment. Melnick and Ledinko have for the first time
been able to carry out serological studies on a large population group and to
establish definitely the ratio of paralytic to nonparalytic cases. The second
development which resulted from the combined observations of several
workers consists in the further documentation of the fact that poliomyelitis
is hyperendemic throughout the poorly sanitated tropical areas of the world.




As a direct consequence of the wide application of in vitro procedures to the
problem of poliomyelitis virus isolation, a variety of cytopathogenic viruses
have been isolated from fecal materials of human origin. Following the orig-
inal recovery of representatives of this group in our own laboratory, many
workers have isolated agents whose relationships to each other as well as
their etiological and epidemiological significance still remain to be elucidated.
Certain of these have been shown to be Coxsackie viruses; others do not fall
in that category. Regardless of the significance of these viruses as eventually
defined, it is apparent that through the use of tissue culture a new approach
has been provided for the study of the viral inhabitants of the human in-
restinal tract.




While methods of tissue culture have been applied extensively to the study
of viruses since 1928, when the Maitlands described the suspended cell tech-


464              1954 J.F.ENDERS, F.C.ROBBINS, T.H.WELLER


nique, it is apparent that there has been a stimulation of interest in this ap-
proach within the past few years. The study of known viruses pathogenic
for man in cultures of human tissue have been profitably applied by various
                                                                                                  27
workers as illustrated, for example, in the report of Kjellén and Svedmyr
who conclude that this system is most suitable for the primary isolation of
the virus of herpes simplex.
  Yet, it is in the investigation of several viruses that manifest a high degree
of host specificity for man that some of the most interesting developments
have occurred. Thus, it has now been amply demonstrated that for certain
purposes, lacking a susceptible experimental animal, the culture composed
of human tissues may be substituted for the human subject. Here it is per-
tinent only to outline briefly certain of these developments.




Concurrently with the poliomyelitis studies, efforts directed at the isolation
in vitro of the etiological agent of varicella were continued in our laboratory.
In 1952, Weller and Stoddard reported that the inoculation with varicella
vesicle fluid of suspended cell cultures of human tissues was followed by the
development of intranuclear inclusions although attempts at serial propaga-
tion of the agent proved unsuccessful. Then, profiting by the accumulated
experience with the roller-tube technique, it was demonstrated that specific
cytopathic changes followed inoculation of such cultures of human tissues
with vesicle fluid materials from cases of varicella or of herpes zoster. With
this culture system, serial propagation in vitro of the agents could be accom-
plished as demonstrated by the regular appearance in subcultures of cyto-
pathic changes that were focal in nature and associated with the presence of
                               28
i n t r a n u c l e a r i n c l u s i o n s . E m p l o y i n g the fluorescent antibody procedure of
        29
C o o n s , and more recently utilizing culture materials as a complement
fixing antigen, immunologic evidence has been obtained to support the the-
sis that the etiologic agents of varicella and herpes zoster have been isolated
and propagated in vitro. It is of special interest that to date no morphologic
or antigenic dissimilarities have been noted that would permit differentiation
of the agents recovered from these two diseases.




In 1951, an epidemic exanthem occurred in Massachusetts that was charac-


            C U L T I V A T I O N    O F       P O L I O M Y E L I T I S   V I R U S E S   465

terized by fever of short duration, a macular to maculo-papular eruption
and the absence of significant adenopathy or Koplik’s spots. Cytopathogenic
agents were isolated in tissue cultures from the feces of seven patients and the
development of specific neutralizing antibodies in paired serum specimens
                     30
was demonstrated . The evidence now indicates that these studies have
resulted in the identification of a new clinical entity.




                                    31
Recently Enders and Peebles               reported that the inoculation of roller-tube
cultures of human renal cells with blood or throat-washings collected from
patients with measles during the 24-hour period following appearance of the
rash, resulted in unusual cytopathic changes. Characteristically, large syn-
cytial cell masses developed that on staining were found to contain nu-
merous nuclei with intranuclear inclusion bodies. The appearance in measles
of a virus-neutralizing antibody reacting specifically with the agents thus
isolated has been demonstrated. Also, fluids from infected cultures contain
an antigen that fixes complement in the presence of serum from persons
convalescent from the disease. It has also been possible to assay the concentra-
tion of neutralizing and complement fixing antibodies reacting with these
agents in various lots of human gamma globulin.




The application of tissue-culture procedures has revealed the existence of a
variety of new viruses that inhabit the respiratory tract of man. Rowe and
              32
his associates noted spontaneously occurring cytopathic changes in cultures
of human adenoid tissue. Further investigations by Huebner and co-workers
have resulted in the isolation of a variety of cytopathogenic agents that may
be divided into at least six groups by immunologic means. Similarly, studies
                                         33
by Hilleman and his associates                of cases of acute respiratory infection have
led to the recognition of a new group of viruses, the pathogenic attributes of
which are now being elucidated.
   We shall now bring to an end this fragmentary account of our results and
 the investigations of others that have widely extended these results and given
 them greatly added significance and value. We regret that the exigencies of
 time and space have prevented in many instances the inclusion of specific
 references as well as more adequate descriptions of their contributions. It is a


466            1954 J.F.ENDERS, F.C.ROBBINS, T.H.WELLER


satisfaction to us, however, that the volume of these contributions is so great
since it testifies to the wide recognition of the value of the tissue-culture
method in the exploration of the fascinating phenomena offered the inves-
tigator by the virus diseases.




 1. A. E. Feller, J. F. Enders, and T. H. Weller, J. Exptl. Med., 72 (1940) 367.
 2. T. H. Weller and J. F. Enders, Proc. Soc. Exptl. Biol. Med., 69 (1948) 124.
 3. J. F. Enders, T. H. Weller, and F. C. Robbins, Science, 109 (1949) 85.
 4. T. H. Weller, F. C. Robbins, and J. F. Enders, Proc. Soc. Exptl. Biol. Med., 7 2
     (1949)153.
 5. J. F. Enders, Poliomyelitis - Second International Poliomyelitis Conference, Lippincott
     Co., Philadelphia, 1952.
 6. T. H. Weller, J. F. Enders, F. C. Robbins, and M. B. Stoddard, J. Immunol., 6 9
    (1952) 645.
 7. A. B. Sabin and P. K. Olitsky, Proc. Soc. Exptl. Biol. Med., 34 (1936) 357.
 8. F. C. Robbins, T. H. Weller, and J. F. Enders, J. Immunol., 69 (1952) 673.
 9. F. C. Robbins, J. F. Enders, and T. H. Weller, Proc. Soc. Exptl. Biol. Med., 75
    (1950) 370.
10. N. Ledinko, J. T. Riordan, and J. L. Melnick, Am. J. Hyg., 55 (1952) 323.
11. J. S. Youngner, E. N. Ward, and J. E. Salk, Am. J. Hyg., 55 (1952) 301.
12. F. C. Robbins, J. F. Enders, T. H. Weller, and G. L. Florentino, Am. J Hyg., 5 4
  ( 1 9 5 1 ) 2 8 6 .
13. A. Svedmyr, J. F. Enders, and A. Holloway, Proc. Soc. Exptl. Biol. Med., 79 (1952)
     296.
14. A. Svedmyr, J. F. Enders, and A. Hohoway, Am. J. Hyg., 57 (1953) 60.
15. A. Milzer, S. O. Levinson, K. Vanderboom, and P. Adelman, Proc. Soc. Exptl. Biol.
    Med., 74 (1950) 136.
16. W. M. Smith, V. C. Chambers, and C. A. Evans, Northwest Med., 49 (1950) 368.
17. W. M. Smith, V. C. Chambers, and C. A. Evans, Proc. Soc. Exptl. Biol. Med., 7 6
    (1951) 696.
18. J. T. Syverton, W. F. Scherer, and G. Butorac, Proc. Soc. Exptl. Biol. Med., 77
     (1951)23.
19. J. E. Salk, B. L. Bennett, L. J. Lewis, E. N. Ward, and J. S. Youngner, J. Am. Med.
     Assoc., 151 (1953) 1081.
20. W. F. Scherer, J. T. Syverton, and G. O. Gey, J. Exptl. Med., 97 (1953) 695.
21. R. Dulbecco and N. Vogt, J. Exptl. Med., 99 (1954) 167.
22. A. B. Sabin, W. A. Hennessen, and J. Winsser, J. Exptl. Med., 99 (1954) 551.
23. J. E. Salk, P. L. Bazeley, B. L. Bennett, U. Krech, L. J. Lewis, E. N. Ward, and J. S.
     Youngner, Am. J. Public Health, 44 (1954) 994.
24. J. E. Salk, J. S. Youngner, and E. N. Ward, Am. J. Hyg., 60 (1954) 214.
25. A. Milzer, S. O. Levinson, H. J. Shaughnessy, M. Janota, K. Vanderboom, and F.
     Oppenheimer, Am. J. Public Health, 44 (1954) 26.


             C U L T I V A T I O N   O F   P O L I O M Y E L I T I S   V I R U S E S   467

26. J. L. Mehick and N. Ledinko, Am. J. Hyg., 58 (1953) 207.
27. L. Kjellén and A. Svedmyr, Arch. Ges. Virusforsch., 5 (1954) 25.
28. T. H. Weller, Proc. Soc. Exptl. Biol. Med., 83 (1953) 340.
29. T. H. Weller and A. H. Coons, Proc. Soc. Exptl. Biol. Med., 86 (1954) 789.
30. F. A. Neva and J. F. Enders, J. Immunol., 72 (1954) 307.
31. J. F. Enders and T. C. Peebles, Proc. Soc. Exptl. Biol. Med., 86 (1954) 277.
32. W. P. Rowe, R. J. Huebner, L. K. Gilmore, R. H. Parrott, and T. G. Ward, Proc.
     Soc. Exptl. Biol. Med., 84 (1953) 570.
33. M. R. Hilleman and J. H. Werner, Proc. Soc., Exptl. Biol. Med., 85 (1954) 183.
