PROTEIN SYNTHESIS, PROTEOLYSIS,  AND CELL CYCLE TRANSITIONS

Nobel Lecture, Docerriber 9, 2001


Tai Hierr
Cancer  Research  UK,   Clare  Hatt  Laboratories,  Smith  Mimms,  Herts  EN6 3LD, Unitwd Kingdom.



Unlike my two distinguished  friends, I dkl  not set out  on my scientific  care'er with tLie 
intention of studying the celt cycle, arid Lmd no  ideci that the minding rocid  of  discovery  
would  Iec›d  in  tLmt  direction.  On   the  contrary,  I  was  hr teresied in the control of 
protein synthesis, thanks to my Ph.D. advisor, Asher Corner,  who  studied  tone  effécts of  
insulin  on  protein  synthesis  in  tLie  rat. When I joined his laboratory in 196d, Asher usecl 
to perform one experiment every week, comparing ihe activity of ribnsomes from the livers of 
control and hypophyseciomised rate Oct md firsi day, Asher  siaggeste'd  that I  spend some time  
in  the  library  to  look  for  an  interesting  project,  chic h  I  did,  finding papers about  
nephrotic  rats wHnse  fivers greatly  incrense'd  their synthesis  of serum albumin to oompermate 
for its fuss thrmigh leciky glnmerular membra- nes. How, I  wondered, dkl  the ribosoeries  ‘know“  
that tLie albumin  levels we- re low, arid how was that  ‘kriowknfge’ translated into erñianced 
albumin Ayr t   esis7 As far as I  know,  this would  still make a good reoecirch project, m  it is 
probably lucky that my fire attempts to make sorrie rats riephrotic Hy injecting them nitln a 
kidney homogenate  were completely unsuccessful.

IN THE BEGINNING: RABBIT RETICULOCYTES
I   was  also  very   fortunate  ihat   Lnuis  Reichardt,   recently   graduated  from Hcirvard,   
had  decicfed  to  spend  the  year  ice  Cambridge,  arid  we  stored  a bench together. Louis Lmd 
learne'd furw to work with rabbit reticuio<ytes, and was trying to rriake a  ceU-free system for 
globiri synthesis that would respond to addecl  haem  Hy  increasing  tLie rate of  glnbin  
syntHesix  Ironically,  while Lou is wets not successful  in his project, either,  Hikiegard 
Larrifrom and Paul Knopf working up the road at the MRC Laboratory  for Molecular Binlogy re- 
porte'd  tlnat  they  were  able to  mcike  a  celt-fre'e  extract  of reticutocytes  that briefly  
mciintained  a  fiigh rate of protein                     I  doei't  beti'eve  we  were aware of  
their efforts at the time.  Arid in tone spring  of 1965,  several of us at- ten‹3e'd  our  first  
scientific  meeting,  a  few  hummed  yards  away  in  the  Che- mistry  Laboratory.  The  
Symposium  was  cfevoied  to  haemoglobin  synthesis and  was  introdiice'd,   very  appropriately, 
 by  Heruy  Borsook  from  Cattech. Borsook  had shown  in the middle  1950s that  reticulocytea 
needed to be sup-

274

plied nitln iron scitts in the medium to maintain a high rate of  protein synthe- sis, but his talk 
on  the  8ih  April  1965  was entitte'd  ‘Early developrrient of  the echirioid  egg  compared  
with  erytfuopoiesis’  (1).  He  contracted  the  resiric- tinel of developmental options f‹nirid  
in rod bloo'd precursors with the imfoi- ding pattern of ‹development s'e'eri  in fertilized s'ea 
urchin eggs Whai  caught my  attention  was his  excellent  account  of  tone  changes  ice  
protein synthesis thai fotlnw sooel after sect urchin eggs are fertilized. Bar  there was no  hope 
of studying  sea urchins in Cambridge,  and  ii  was a tcilk by  Vernon  Ingram that got  rue 
starred  in  researc h.  Ingram  spoke  about  the  relationstiip  beineeel Lmem arid gk›bin 
synthesis, arid  presented some preliminary  data that be  in- terpreted to incficate that 
ribosorries formed a qu   ae behind the sequence ice globiri that w‹niId form the  Lmem pockei.  He 
 used the methodology that had been inDoduced    hard Dintzis in his bmlGmni experiment which 
slnnned  that  proteins  were  mcide  from  N-  to  C-terminus  (2).  When  we  got Hack  to  the  
laboratory,  we realised that  Ingram  had  interpreted  Lais data ex- actly backwards,  and thcit, 
if his idata were correct, they mecint  that  ribosornes raced  ‹3own  the   mRNA  until  the  h  
em  was  added  and  then  slowest   riglnt down.  So   Tony  Himter  and  I  decided  to  repeat  
the  experiments,  making crime improvements  to the experimental approach, building our own 
electro- phoresis tank and teaching ‹nirselvea  the rudiments of  protein chemistry, mn- c‹niraged  
Hy  Alan  Munro.  THe results  were  slow  in  coming,  but  eventually proved  beyond  dnubt   
that  ihe   ribosomea  paid  rio  attention  whcitsnever   to when tHe haem wets added and were  
norrriaJIy  distributed  completely  at rcin- dom   along the  globiri messenger RNA  (3). Certain  
tricLs allowed us to show that ‹rim methcids w‹niId  have encib1e'd us to see queues,  haH they 
existed.
Cine ‹day, I  let a centrifuge run too long arid we accidentaiiy  discovered that
q-globin chciins were metric Hy smarter poiysorriws  than §-chciiris (d) , cirid we Rei out  to  
discover  the  cause  Hy  compciring  the  ratea  of   elongcitinn  of   tone  two chains. By 
omitting  an extremely  elementary  control,  we wrongly  concluded thai §-chciins took longer to 
translate  than q-chains,  a misinterpretation that wets  letter correcte'd by  Here Lc›dish  (5). 
This was a sharp lesson  about con- trol experiments.  We missed another trick, too, whim h would 
have been to dis- cover that 6oih globin chains were initiated with a metfiionine resâ<iue. In  
ihis case,  ‹rim  mistake  wee  not  to  believe  our  own  results  arid  to  asc ribe  them 
wrongly  to  contamination.  Fortunately,  Richard  jackson  and  Tony  Hunter later corrected  
this oversight  before anyone else  (6).
In   1968,  I  left  Cambridge  arid  sent  to work  in  New  York  with  Irving  M. London,  who  
wets  tlnen  tHe chairman of  the Department  of  Medicine  at  ihe Albert  Einstein College of  
Medicine. Irving  had worked with David  Shemin, the mam who head elucidated  the biosyntiieiic  
pcithway of   h  em,  and was pcis- sionateiy  interested  in  the  question of  few  haem 
regulated  globiri  synthesis. A6oui  ihJs  time,  Howard  Schulrriari  discovered  that  addition  
of  hc›emiri  to Lamfrom  and  Knopf's  lyscite sustained  prolonged  high  rates of  protein  sys 
thesis  (7}  arid  ii  was  a  simple  Archer  to  confirm  ihis result  and  Atari  a pro- gramme 
‹designed  to  find out how tone haem was working  in molecular terrors. Many  people  contribute'd 
 to  this endeavour,  in  particular  Marco Rabinonitz

at the  NIH who discovered a domincint inhibitor of protein synthesis that for- med often the 
reticulocyte  lysates were incubated  for long periods at 37° ice the   absence of addecl haemin 
(8). The molecufcir  nature of this inhibitor and the basis of its mode of action were to remciin 
obscure for another five or  six and  as so often,  ice my experience of  research, the  ctuea and  
answers
came from iruiirect attacks in unexpected quarters, rather than a full frontal assault. For Marco‘s 
inhibitor prove'd very cfifficult to  purify.
The  first clue carrie from a collaboration  nitln a neighbour  in the  Depart- ment of Medicine,  
Ne'c1naina Kosower. Nechama's husband Ed was a chemist who had suggested the use of a mild 
oxidizing agent catte'd ‘diainide’ to cure sickle cell anciemia {I cannot  reconstruct the train of 
thinking). The diamide rapidly convened  ghitatlniorie to  its oxidised form and
protein synthesis in  intc›ct  reiiculncytes. We assumed  tlnat  tLie effect on pro- tein synthesis 
was somehow connecte'd  witln  the   fuss of GSH, and  started  to use the  celt-fre'e lysate 
system to  investigate.  One  day it occurred  to me that the  inhibition  could  be  due  to  the  
formation  of GSSG  rather  than  k›ss  of GSH, and I tested the efects of ridding GSSG to  tLie 
lysate ice the   presence of optimal levels of  Lmem. To my surprise and joy  (because it had  not 
occurred to the others), miruate arriounts of GSSG caiisecl ari inhibition of protein syn- thesis  
that  was very  rerriiniscerit  of  tLmt  seen  when  hciem  was  omitted  (9) . Protein synthesis 
at  firsi occurred  at a fiigh  rcite, mud  then initiation shut off aRer  a few  minutes. Jusi as 
nitln omitting  haem,  protein synthesis could  be restored after  its shut-oif,  in  this case by  
addition  of  a  reducing agent  like dithiothreitot. At snme point, it was foimd thai ci':Edition 
of N-'eifiyl mateimicfe was a  very  good  may of  turning  oel the  Rabinowitz  inhibitor,  m  a  
finger  of siaspicioel pointed  at critical  —SH groups: but  tfiis apparent  clue never really red 
anywhere. Richard Jackson  and  I  (Figure 1)  reiurr›e<i to  study the  GSSG effe'ct some yecirs 
later, ar›d discovered tLmt the   inhibition of protein synthesis was due  to fuss of reduced NADP 
ar›d gtucos'e-6-pimsphate, wfiich took us off into studies  of  thiorodoxin  and  tlnioredoxin  
roductase.  Affinity  chromato- graphy  using 2’,5’  ADP Sepharnse  (wfiich  binds many  
NADP-requiring en- zymes)  proved extremely  usefiat  in this analysis and the wHnle episode was a 
v'  ry good arid enjoyable seriea of lessons in practical biochemistry of a neither otofashineled  
kield (10, 11).
At atx›ut  the  time of  the  cotlaboratinel nitln the  Kosoners, r'esearcfi on  ihe
mechanism of action of Haem on  protein synthesis was riot going well, and as a diversion I decided 
that it w‹nild be fun to see if tLie reticulncyte tyscite c‹nild translated aHcfed potinviriis RNA, 
and if so, to work out  the  gene order using essentia3iy  the  same methods that Toely  Hunter  
and  I had  employed  ice our studies  of  giobin  syntHesix  I  cfiscoverod  that  tlnere  was  a  
group  in  Hcirry Eagle's Department of Cell Biology who norke<f  oel poliovirus, and went and 
begged sorrie RNA horn Does Suerimerx Armtysis of the secretion on the eleniy- in e1e•d 
SDKpolyecgUmndde gel shcmwod no sgn ofsny    Iy   ihesñed
fiigh  molecular  weight  pro<hict(s),  however, and  I suspected  (correctly,  as it
turned out mciny years fetter) ihat factors from the riucleated cells that polio- tins normally  
infe'cte'd were require'd for the  initiation of polio protein Ayr

276
































thesis. To teet tlnis idea, I collaborated  ritln Ellie Elnrenféld, and  made tLie ex- citing 
discovery th& potiovirua-infected HeLa celt cytoplasm contained a po- tent  inhibitor  of  
retimitocyte  iyeate  protein  synthesis  (12) .  The   inhibition looked almost exactly like tLmt 
seen when haem was omitted or GSSG adcied. What was cfiifererrt,  however, acts the  identity  of 
tire inhibitor, which herd tLie remarkable properties of  he& stability, s'sdimeritatinn at 205 in 
a fairly sharp peak, and  resistance to cfigestion with DNase, RNase arnd  proteases  We were 
Halted for aeverai weeLs by this mysterious subatain:e, shone cissay acts very te- (and  
non-linear) , becmise of course RNcioe anci  proteases were cieadty inhibitors of  protein 
syeltheeis arid every assay ielvolve'd  re-isolating  the  inhi- bitor oel siacrooe gradients to 
separcite it horn tLie various agents uae'd to  pro- be its identity. let tLie end, after a 
ciepreesing pericid wLien we cieduced th& we must be cheating ritln a giant  complex carbobydr&e, 
whooe analysis We knew ourselves unabie to conclude, we realised that ck›uble-stranded RNA  had  
aft tire properties of our  iunkrmrel.  (13). We consulted with Jerry Hurwitz oel tLie 9th  floor, 
who siaggeeted we used  microoocccil  ruactease, arnd  not  to  forget  to cn3d  tLie caickim, 
which sensed  the  seed  of  tire miclecioe-tre&ed  reticulocyte iyeate  assay  syeterri  for  
eukaryotic  mRNA  tLmt  Hugln  Pelham  eventually  de-

The  micrococcat  nuclecioe  made tone  inhibitor  ciiaappear  completely,  and tire  next  step  
was  to  see   if  tire  effe'ct  was  specific  for  poliovirat  daRNA.  I bought some poly I:C 
from Sigmci and  teete'd it horn 1 mg/ml duvet in S-fold steps and was puzzled to field that only 
the very loweat conoerrtratiori seemed

277

tn  cmise sigjfificant inbibitinn. It was reasonable to suppcise that I head simply 
pMoeOtheemnpeBbecRtmhorflmthesdndh#mnoounter,eoIrepestedthe experñnerfl vñh a much eñder range 
ofoonce1c*iflorm ofthe qr#heti d   Aand#sseiacuehAvñthlsbeflLagofthesmnpeiThenemitsvene 
m»mGog.Notonlyddh hliEofdflRNAbUvdbapnoimo   m   ,but
IewTB  requ   ed  for  ird ib    ozs  were staggezingly low: we later  cakuTated
it      it woMf  one   tzdce ozze  molecuk  of polisñzzzs  replica6w  Alarm EA          to 
compTeteTy Exhibit  protein         heala by the  mill  area oI  ziboeomeB present in a WW  celt. 
The ‹ISRNA thezelaze had to be ac6ng catalyticalty anct not  as we at imagined  by rrémic@rzg the  
fl' end   of mRNA and  I trat  zg out   aorr¥e inz-
tlatlorz Actor. We cozz@ ezcgTl the laclc oI  in       itozy eRect oI  high         TB of daRNA Hy 
suppc sing that  two  molecule  of tLe  putative pm-inhibitnr  head  tn Hind side-hy-aide nri the  
RNA, and  later hcick ice Ccimbridge,  Hugh Robertson and  Tneiy  Hunter  fniund  that  a  stretch  
of  ab'out  50  micleotideo  of  perfectly double-atrar›rk›d RNA GB        Uirml to  activate the  
inhibitor  (15), a  pre-echn odmch more rr¥odem timea it     e zpTain svhy it in izzzportant Dior ' 
    Ai' to be

THe aierfilarity nf tone kind nf inbibitinri caused Hy lcick of haem or cn3dition of GSSG or  daRNA 
strongly siaggeotnd th& they muat  hm'e mn imderlying me- chsnimnincowsnon,aod 
theñwdler4tléeordyincre*r*ed#frnaIleRthelBronx and   returned  to Cambridge  at  the  enct oF 1870 
to  be reurdted  smith  rz¥y old FrlndB Tony Hunter and Richar‹t]ackaon. By u-›en, they had 
‹tisoose›ed that protein          hesla  was  Tztiated  @  a  egeciaT  met    iozdzae  IONA,  
Met-tRNL, which pzo           an  important  no    tool Dior irzw              g the  pathway 
o€inztia-
N Og QKOtUIU                    Brad SIB COntzol by the  strange ooTTe     on   oF dzspazate 
inhibitors.  Ozzz  neu¥t  great  Weight  came whezz  Seve           n and Chr a  Darza- brough 
found that a presioudy ignored corupW beheeen Met-tRNA£anct40S riboaorr¥es  cl sappeared  Vellore  
protein                    s zztt  oR    (16).  It  was  then WaIzty  s   ztple  to  she      it    
   these  cozzzplezes   €ozzr¥ed  wi       ut   the    need  for MRNA,  and  we  realised that  
riboaorr¥es mat    find         stazt oI EA        by scan- rzizzg  the    meeaage  smith  the    
ar¥tioodorz  of  the   initiator  tRNA.  Once  it  was eata                dogma  it      tRNA only 
bound  to TI               B It   the            M       OU  Og MRNA,  our   paper  rr¥et th       
a  h+uadIe and   aoepticaT  reception  on  fat    atzbmiB- tion, anct we r›e›nded  help from        
   Matt another ez-     rnezite, wk   was by  thezz  wor@ng  at  the  ARC Laboratory  of  Molecular 
 BioJojgy  and   Liad de-
veloped a method for assaying mRNA.

INTRODUCTION TO PROTEIN  KINASES
@ztt heze a          we got stuck for a while, TazgeTy Rae           we  were using         re- 
Oocyte lyaate aa  an  aaaay        em,  and   either  total  prote     B    I         B OF  the 
Cozzzaa6on  of  the  40S-Met-tRN@ oomplexes  as  the  read-ozzt.  We  did   zzot  ae- rimzdy  
attezzzpt  to  it             paztlal  reacting  }acge}}r         m \sr•  rzorze  oI   us  fact 
proper  biouhezzzical  trairzizzg, and   we Wd  gat  a  Eng   svzgr eiznp/ area         g  this 
wonderly  ac6e ceTlbW  B    UW.  At  u-›is  uage, I  don't  tI›tnk  we  seriously tz        even  
to  pzzzi/ any of the  izd ib   org   and   did   not  seziozzsly speculate  on

wLmt  tLie un‹3eriying  molecular  explanations  might  be.  It w‹ni kl have beech too far. 
Ir›siend, Steve Legon followed  up  a clue that eye tic AMP might  have some connection with tone 
various inhibitory conditions,  arid begael to iesi aU mmnner  of  puriries,  many of  which 
aileviate'd  the  effécts of  leciving  out  ihe Lmem or  ridding dsRNA  (17) . These 
pLienornenologicai effécts were further pursue'd  Hy Keel Baiknw,  wHn  had   joined ihe  
laborcitory  stormy  before a tre- merufous fire cormimed the entire laboratory, and force'd our  
cfeparture io a teciching laboratory in Hererian Lehmann‘s clinical bioc hemisiry Department at the 
Addenbrooke‘s Hospital The cfestructinel of art previous results and  the new ciose contact with 
molecular biologists, in  particular nitln Jotted Gurdon's group, were highly  beneficial, and  
once the  laboratory was set up  and  run- ning again, progress was qu ite rcipid. Richard Jackson 
begael to gei evi‹3ence that ATP might be  necessciry  for the  inhibitor of initiation to form, 
and  rea- lised ihai it st ould be possible to test nlnether ATP wets also necessciry for ihe 
inhibitor  to aci by using a partial reaction, the  bincfing of Mn-tRN@ to d0S ribosoernH 
siabuelits, which required GTP but not ATP. Tfiis proved successful, and inhibition ctecirty 
require'd ATP, someifiing ih»t nouid  never Lmve emer- gecl from stucfies of bulk protein 
synthesis. From there it was a very short step to adding  labelled  ATP to  the   inhibition  
reactions and  seeing a  new  phns- pfioryfate'd bmnd form. This was tLie work of a taiente'd new 
grciduate student, Paul Farrell. We also discovered  that  both tLie haem-regulated inhibitor  arm 
the   dsRNA-activcited   inhibitor   tended   to   undergo   self-phospHneyfation. Moreover,  tLie 
i‹3entity of  the  target for  phosphorylation emergecl ahnost  at once, because the  mote'cular 
weight  of the  eriajor target  Hand correspondecl stzspiciou       closed  to  one  of the  
szzbtazzits of  ed-2 which  had  zecezzt     been isofate'd  lay Tlneo Staehetiri  arid his 
colkmgues  Hans Trachsel and  Bernhard Erni at  tLie Basel Irmtitute for  lerimimotogy. This 
protein formed a complex Pitt Mei-tRN@ and GTP, arid delivered tone tRNA to  the 40 S ribosome. It 
was a  very  scitisfying  explanation  for  tLie  previous  5 years of  accumulated  phe- 
nomenology,  and ii simply find to  be  rigbi  (18) . I went to Basel for  a week or two to  learn 
furs to make and  handle the factor,  in the  process for the  firsi time seeing at firn Lmnd how 
proteins were jnirifien. It was riot long before we Lmd convinced ourselves that phospHnryfafioel 
of CIF-2 was responsible for ihe inhibition   of   protein   synthesis,   but   there   was   one   
 remciining   puzzle. Phosphorylation of eIF-2 did r›ot seem to impair its ability to form 
complexes wnh Met-tRNA  and  GTP, nor its abilny to deliver iriniator tRNA to  the  dOS ri- boeome. 
Gzadua/ it emerged that what went wnozzg was the  abiñ    of the ed-2 tore'cycle, specifically to 
exchange its GDP for new GTP. Cirice agciin, our  lack of  proper  biochemical skills prevented  us 
from making  mny significant  corr tribution  to the  icientification  of  the  GDP/GTP  cxc hange 
facior  kmonel as eIF-2B. Similarly, despite considerable efforts, I failed miserably to purify ihe 
Intern-regulated protein kinam or to understcind its mode of activation, and  we fared no bett'er 
wi8n the  cfsRNA-activate'd protein kinase now krmwn as PKR
Getting to ihe  bottom of  this kind of  regulation  of  protein  syn8nesis  was
very satisfying. We find be'en face'd with a tong-standing  mystery and worked it out. The answers 
mci':3e sense arid  lnoked as tfimigh  they  might  have neither

wicier applicability. Huring cry stay in  New York, I head spent a coupie of weeks one summer in 
Gordon TOWQkiM’B IBMT8tO    at  UCSF looking at ’the pleio- typic  program’  (18)  close  up,  and  
head seeel how  extremely  easy it  xem  tn  in- hibzt  polyaome lozmation @ a3J IdndB OF WBd abuse 
of nucleated ceTTs         Jd zt be   that        global control of proteizt gthee a aeerz      
Wtwed ceTTs atau
of  azrdno side or gtucoae,  or  subjected  to szzdden  c   azzges in  temperate, realso simply 
ciue  tn  pimspfioryl&ioel nf eIF-22 I grabbml ari opportunity presented  hy Tom  Humphreys  tn  
help tecich  tire Embryologjr  Gourae at  ihe Marine Biological Lubor&ory, Scuds Hnle in the 
suerimer of 1877 in order tn get my handa on aome sea  used eggs, and  bek   home in  Uxbridge we 
set B6  WdUUtB       T@rzg  on   kg            ceTlAee  Jenna  mom  nucleated
N\\B IO         i€ what  was true oI retzWocyteB svae uniwrsaT.  Progzeae was my dlsapgoi        g, 
in try     caee rather deeming to szzggeet thst the              was no. Abozzt  the   oldy  
interesdng tag      to emerge froro theae studies was anotha protein  @rzaae,  which  looy Walker  
and         I Az¥dersorz diaoosered @ aclcâng DNA to  ceg-See ezrtzactB of Heb    ceIIB   20) . We 
dded to appreciate it      UB needed   en‹BofDNA,oVeve]vk*onLuerfound(21).m‹h som   - experiern:e 
with  DNS   It we   in  any  ccise qurte clear that this had  nothing tn do with tHe control nf 
protein eyntiieais.
The  aea urcffin eggs were more difficult to work with than I tiad imagined, tcio, arid  this was 
riot  helped hy the  equiprrient arid  iayout nf  the  MBL's em- brynlogiccil claaaioom. The  idea 
was to  stu‹Jy fertEiz&ion in  m many different phyla mud organisms as p<aaibie, uairig the  
simpiml p<aaiHle equipment and a microscope.  Biochemical  apprncir:hes were  not  nuach  in  
xogue, and  mining
\B IWQ       he    it   brat.  There  was zoo liquid  nitzogezz  or   —80°  freezers,  and
Epperidorf  tut›es  ar›d Gilson  pipettors  were  eloxehere  to  tie amen.  Mnrenver, Mne seseoo 
for sea umchñn eggs wsBshonQ aodI heO oo expernenoe. for er- ample, I  head always thought that 
blcs>d and   aeci water had  sirrfilar innic com- positions,  but  this turnnrl  out  tn be  quite 
fafae, aea  water  being  much  more cnnoentr&ed. So what shoulci nrie use as a homcigeréaatinri 
mmlium tn have aeiy hnpe nf obtaining an cictive cell-free eyatem in  wtiicln tn study protein ayn- 
ti›eais?  By  then,  Richard  jacLson  and  I  hc›d  almc›at  completely  defined  the sallezzt 
ions and Tw rz¥oleczzlar weight cam   otazzds that were presezzt in  the  re- ocyteB (22), and  we 
had  a Iceen apprec%t@n  of How important  they were
for  the   maizzterzarzoe  of             zate  protein  gthee  a,  to   say   not   ¥tU     OF SIB



SEA URCI-ON AND CLAM EGGS

tire enhilar&ioel of learning nesz things, fur  though  Wrn>du Hnle had been a disappointing  
research  eelvirnrimerit for  what I wanted to cm, it  was tHe per- fect  pierce to  learn cell 
anci mnlecular  and  dexeiopmerital biologjr because of tire stream nf expert lectuw ona wide 
variety nf tnpics, together witln tone op- QOMDI        ION FROM   D Mths,  bBfB BM   been:hes. So  
I  had   no  prciblem  in agreeing  tn return tHere ice 1878 (higure  2) , except tLiat I  crow 
inaiatnd  oel a
































—80’ heezer being provided and merit witln a suitcase full of aft the  little linings I  might 
creed — tub'es and  tips and  gel-pt&es arnd even a peristciltic  jnimp — so that  I  comet  set  
up  a  lab  away  from  ix›me.  During  that  summer,  Dennis Batfinger and  I followed up  a hint 
horn two years before horn Tom Anne th& changes  ill phosphozyTation cmzI<I  be   seert  irt sea  
urchin  eggs  item  fertiliza-
tion(23). The protect to be seq   mTuT experiertoe,  irt fact, because zuzzzaing SOS 
poiycicrylamide gels of fertilized sea urchin eggs acts rx›t compieteiy triv- ial, owing  to  the  
powerful  protectors  present  ice tire head  (cicrosome)  of  tLie sperm.  But  even  more  
rewarding  acts  helping  Eric  RosentLml  and   Joan dezmart  with  Air     analysis  of  the   
Aging  patterzzs  oT  protem  syzzthesis
€otaricl irt  c   ¥m oocytes. Brzzoe tar¥dhorst  had zecertt/  made <IetaiIed feties ofseauwhm 
eggs, and had concIudect           theze waslittle  J  arty essence of a change on  the  @rtds  of  
proteins  made  before  azad  Nez    Tertilizatiort  {24) . But  c  ¥ms were site  azaothez  
matter,  probably  becmzse  nhezeaa  see  urchin eggs  are              in  a  km<l                 
       state,                 completed  meiosis  m  the ovary,  nan    eggs are  m fact  
G2-arrested  oocytes, arzct féztiTleation  uses thezn
to complete meicmis,  rather as progesterone cicts oel frog oocytes exoept with
a cfifférerrt time       le. jomn and   Eric load beautiful gels showing a spectcicular change in 
tire synthesis of & tecist three prominent bmnds on  a lfiimernioriat gel after fértilizatiori, and 
 it acts easy  to stlor  that the  mRNA encoding tfieee proteins was present before fértilizatiori, 
Hy celt-free cissay  ice tone  reticulocyte iyeate. It was also a simple mutter to demonstrcite 
that tire mRNAs were in tLie
urttrazzslated  ”          9      compartment   m  the oocytes,  and  shiRed  ortto  po/-































signed to see if there were any differences in tLie p&tered of protein synthesis ice property  
fertilized sea urchin eggs compared  to eggs activated  Hy  tire cai- ckim inelophore,  A23187. By 
tfiis time, I fmer  exciclty  how  to do  the  experi- erient and  to prepare the nmptes for tire 
get analysis I acfHecl [°T]methinnine to suspensions of  the  eggs  in MiUipore-filtere'd sea  
water  ice a  SO-rrd  beaker. Scimptm  were  removed  &  intervciis  irrto tricLdoraoetic acid,  
and  the  protein precipit&es wasHecl with aoetone before dissolving ice sample buffer. I did  not 
wmnt to  mim any  trarnients, and  also wanted to build some redurulancy  into the experiment. In 
retrospect, it is aermzirig that tfiis simple experiment hadn't been done before — after alt, we 
had  dune exactly the  same thing using ’TO cis the    label  —  why  we Lmd  never  uaed  
["S]methionirie,  if  only as a kind  of cfciss ciemonatratiori, is a mystery. I tilt return to the 
queatioel of why  nobody ence dkl   it, either, at the end of this account, in a footnote about 
gels.
The  autoradiogram   slx›wed  something  very  odd   and    unexpected,  for attHnugh  most of the  
Hanch  got stronger  and  stronger  as tiene sent  by,  one Har›d  did   clot  show  this,  the  
expected  behavi‹nir.  It  started  cis  one    of  tLie strongest, twit at  a certain  point  it 
faded away. It  wets ciifficutt  to  think of any other explanation  than tLmt it underwent 
specific  (in the serine th& no otiier Lmr   fs were aIfecte'd)  proteoijrsis  at  some poielt  in 
the  carry cfevelopment  of
egg. The  partiienogeneticatty  activated  samples dkl  riot  show siacln clear disappearance.
Diat very evening, I chanted to meet John Gerfmrt  again & the  mine and ciieeoe party tLiat 
failures after tLie Friday evening Lecture. He told erie about tire  experiments  on  MPF  that  
he,  Mike Wu  and   Marc Kirsclnner  Lmd  beech

283

doing (2s) , and the priceless information tLmt, although the first appear      e of M PF in  frog 
eggs provokecl by tone ieljectinel of MPF did not require protein synthesis, the s'e<orid wave of  
MPF corresponding  to the second meioiic cfivi- sion  ‹fi‹f  require  new  proteins to be made. 
This was electrifying,        oi isr•  it siaggWe'd  ih»t a  protein  was consiarnecl  at  the  end 
 of  meiosis I so  that  new protein synthesis was required to replenish  it. Tfiis kield of 
behaviour was, of course, excictty what I had  seen ih»t morning ice the   behaviour of .::ycliel. 
It is wortln noting tLmt betwe'eri tone two meiotic divisions there is rio replication of DNA, en 
that 8ne explanation for a protein synthesis requirement  during the cell cycle that was much in 
the air at the  time, ihat of snaking n'ew histories to package up the DNA, did riot apps. Ii 
seemed fcir more likely tFmt if MPF was turned on  hy some kind of  pnst-transfatinna3 
modification,  it was ñarned off hy the  most drastic of all such mcidifications, proteotysix Yet 
we stopped short of cone kiding thai MPF musi contain cyclist as one of its submits: that wmild be 
or0   one  of errand possible explanations,  and it seemed extremely improb- able that we shmild 
have hit so lucky lay chance. Nev'erthetm, ice the   course of 8nis, easily the  most exciting 
conversation of  my scientific life, the outline of the  now conventional view of the  cell cycle 
as deperuling ice part on  program- me'd  proieniysis was  born,  more  or  less fully  f1e'dged.  
It was  oel July  22nd, 1982.  I musi say 8nat site h "'eureka’  moments are very,  very rare in my 
expe- rience. It normally  takes s'everat weeks of experiments to tecise out  the  truth even when 
ymi Fmve a really pretty good idea of sLmt is going on.
Ii was of course clear  tFmt  the  experiment  musi  be  repented, and  that  we slnnuld check cell 
cycie progression as beet we could at the same time, using a nice healthy batch of eggs ih»t 
underwent synchronmis cfivisiori. We needed to check 8ne comings and goings of cyclist in relation  
to the cell cycle. Tom Evans, a Cambridge project sñadent, Pmd come with rue tFmt summer to aci as 
an assisimnt,  mud  he  and   I set to work to dn as much as we possibly  cmild  be- fore the 
Arfrscia egg  seasnn eride'd.  We soon confirmed the  behaviour  of cy- clist, and  sturwed ih»t ii 
was continuously synthmized arid periodically almnst compieteiy degraded, about 10 miraitm before 
the fertilized eggs cfividod. We trie'd but faite'd to assees the  meiaphase to anaphase 
transition, arid we added every  known  inhibitor  of  cell  cycle  progression  (as we  naivety  
uncierstood them at 8ne tirrie) to see  if they affe'cte'd the  oscillations of cyctiri. Dan 
Disiet, another  student, was doing a  project  that  wasn‘t  going well, so  I siaggesied that he 
take a look in c lain eggs to s'ee if aely proteins came arid merit. Much to our  surprise and  
delight,  fiis lovely  get of  August  IN   showed  that  the  two larger trarisfationa3iy 
regulated proteins A mud B were botL cyrtins, whereas C behaved coelventiorial3y, mud accumufate'd 
steadily. By labelling  later embryos and then ‘c hosing’ with the  protein synthesis inhibitor,  
emeiine,  it was pos- sible to see tFmt cycliri was stilt disappearing well into cleavage. We 
announced our findings at the Armuat Genercit  Metering of the  MBL  (29) , but later kept quiei 
about this shori note, test it prevent publication  in a ‘proper“ journal.
The apparent size of sea  urchin cyclin jucfged  hy its pt   mobility  was v'ery close to that of 
tubuliri, and  foriunateiy for us there were a number of recit cx- pens ice the   course that 
summer.  john  KiJmartin,  who  was  a  hiend  of  Joel

284

Roaerzbmzro'B,  fact  recently  obtaizzed  an  ezceTknt  and-tubuhn  mozzoclozaal antibcsJy which  
he  had  attached  to Sepharose,  so it xem  eaejr tn  see  if  cyclist did  or  clici  not   bind, 
 and  eriy  gradu&e stucient  Sarah  Bray  fnund  first,  th& cyclist was Hy no  mean entirely 
anluHle, secnnd, that it did  not  Hind tn the  ool- urrim, and   third, tLmt another nf the  
labelled  proteins, oorreoporuling tn hcind C nf tire clam as it 1&er turvn›d out, was 
quantitatively retairn›d Hy the   coliunn, alnng  witln  tone  tubidin.  We a8aiamed  at  first  
that  it  was a  newly-synthesized m   zotu      e-aasorfiated    protein,   but   in   Gael,   ztB 
  6terzzzizzzzs   €oztuitozzsly m&cln›d the  epitope tLmt tire antibciciy  recognised, act carry 
leo8nel ice the   use of aritibcidJeo in  reoenrch. Later,  Nancy Staridart  mcide goc›d  use  of 
this anti- lady  and  we  found  it  coulci  be  used  fur  aBlnity  cfunmatography  nf  wh& turned 
  out  to   be   tire   siruifl   subunit   of   ribonucientide   reductase   (30). Ironically, 
botln this enzjxrie submit  mud the   QB          BN           tire QFOQ'R       1N& they were juat 
nrie submit of a tacrautninit  protein nf which the  other subunit we  laid down in eggs as part of 
the  ermternai endowment, but we xeere not  tn

Althozzgh  there  seemed  to  be  a  atzBpicima4y  cloae  zela6ozzship   between cyclñisnd    , 
andthebehaiourofcyc]Lae  IyexpLdnedhow     ass fiuzrie6 of   at  the  end   oI  rzétosla,  we were 
zzziTeB from prig aosyzzch thing.
Iruieed, theuoiereslityof        byoomesrmestabñehedatdmttñme. The oo#m*yfocw   
usstoWone,eegueooesmoexp   c   intoftnocn*t#hst3 was, as  weTT  as   to   irate         
oozzsequezzceB of  itB       U-appearance,  sv   ich we imagined might be p<aaiHle using 
antibcidieo, fur example. But there were no  peopte  or  grWtB OK’ Indeed  aea  UWhIUB  IN  Ridge 
anct  any  progress Lmd tn  wait urrtil tire neat suerimer. I wrote up the initial cibservatinns 
arid Terri tiiem tn Gels, whn replied that they would  publish tone paper, but in ’nothing IN    IB 
 want  form’.  One  nf  the   reviewers  aaid  that  it  repented  ’wild spectilatinel  Haaed nri  
dublOUB 1     C’, And I still hlush when I look at even the revise'd  mraioel  that  appeared  in  
the late apring of  1B83  (31) ,  altHnugln  tHe Discuminn ended nri a deliberately guarch›d note: 
’The paraflels between tHe behm'inr  nf MPF and  cyclin are  striking,  but  whether tHere is a 
clirecl corres- pondence between tHe pfiyaiolcigical entity arid the  ciieenical one  remains tn be 
determined“.  be  did  not ovm-interpret  the  dciv 
By  the    neat  Spring,  the  whole episcide felt  like a  dream  tLiat  anemed  in crecmirigJy  
tcio  gcmd  to  tie  true.  I  tried  to  explain  how  exciting  this was  tn emryone I  mci, twit 
the  general  reaction was sceptical. Ii  had rarer  (mfar as I  know,  nr  hm'e been  able tn find 
in  fairly extensive reading nf the  olci litera- ture)  been siaggmled  befnre that cell cycle 
control erfight irwnlxe  prnteolysis

pomible,  fur  the   reoer  iy-deocribz›d  uHiquitiri  eystem  had   been  defined  in teixru  of  
a  mechanism  For  degrading  urik›lded  or  cien&urml  protew.  Not until  Michael   Glntzm   leR  
ari  autnrcn3iograpfi  to   expose  oxer  a  lung  ski weeWrzd  in   T990  d@   the   fret  sip     
appear  thst  progzamzz¥ed   p     tBDI     B cmild cicctir hy the  uHiqukin  pathway  (  2) .
)oz›atHan PineB @d lbs ’Pazt D Project’ th      me in the BQTIU    0€ 1083, and agreed  to  join  
zz¥e as   a  glad  yWe  atzzdent  to  work  on              in  the  mztuzzm.

Mesrnsfiile,   another   project  student,  Richard   Gornatt,  came  with   me   to Woods Hoie as 
my assiatmnt that aammer, jonathan  having decicR'd to  bicycle cicross  the   U.S.A.,  mnding  up  
briefly  ice  Woods  Hoie  at  the  suermier’s  end. When Richard and I got to the MBL, tLie firat 
thing we trie'd acts simply to  re- pe&  tLie famous experiment. Much to my relief, cyclin wets 
stilt there anci stiU stunned excictty  tire same behavi‹nir, and  Richard  set about trying to 
find  out stay when                                                be€oze  oz  aRez  the   
metaphase  to  arza- pLmse  transitions We were  hetpe'd  Hy Yoafiio  Masui, the  mciater  of MPF,  
who was  on   the   faculty  of  the   Embryotogy  Couroe  downstciirs  arnd  very  kindly sturwod  
us finns to  do  orcein staining. Eiayne Bornslaeger  looked at tire effects of  inhibiting  DNA 
synthesis on  the  behaviour  of  cyclin,  and  confirmed  th& tlnis  prevented  the  oetls 
entering mil'nsis, completely stabilising cycfin. It  be- ccime clear  th& cjrcliel ciiaappeare'd  
very clnse  to  tone  time of the  metapLmse-

disappeararn:e anci examine the  oonaequencex
By this time, of couroe, I was trying to  find  out everything  that was kncnsn about oett cycles 
and  their control. I read reviews ar›d books and  taiked to aU sorts of people,  but rx›rie of 
them mined nuicln light oel what I was trying to iur deratmnd.  Nobody had  ever siaggeeted t1n& 
something  might have to go msay in  order  to keep the  cycle  Warning,  cis far   as  I  could 
see. In  ciiscussions  with people, everyone agreed  that  tlnis wasn't such a ridiculous idea. 
Morevoer, it fitted  in very well with wh& wets known about the role of  protein synthesis in early 
development. As Wagenaar and  Mazia ar›d Wagenaar  reported  (33), bor- rowing  on  Hukin’s  
original observ&ions  (Rd) , protein  synthesis was needed for entry into mitosis ciuring early 
cleavage, arnd wets required in the firat  Lmlf of  every  oeU  cycle,  quite  consistent  with  
tire  idea  that  protein  or  proteins neeHecl  to  be  replaced  Hy  new synthesis after  they  
load  been  degraHecl,  al- tix›ugh  of cmiroe tLie proteins in question  cnuld  leave been usecl 
up  ice other Ways — asserribty into clnromatiel, for  excimpte.
During that summer,  Aruirew  Murray  looked  Lmrd  for  cyciins  in  buciding but  was unable to 
detect  any  by  tLie  kind of  pulse-cLmse  methcids th& worked so melt in sect urchins. By this 
time, too, Eric Rosenthal  head succeeded in  idezzti     rug  clones Tar  c  ¥m cycTin  A  in  
cDNA  libraries  (35},  whereas  we Lmdei't  even starte'd  to  mcike  libraries from sea  urchins, 
and  material  was ice dmm  suppg. BecR in    bridge, nobodg in the Oochemñnp Depwbnern
Lmd aely experience of recombinant  DNA work, anci irufeecl, the  ruts andre-
gal&ions were still rather tight: special roorrn arnd dediccitecl equipment were required for this 
kind of work, arnd ice any   ccioe, surprisingly few people yet ap- preciate'd  tire  revohitioel  
that  was taking  pierce.  We were  regarded  cis  hope- lessly  merrily,  and   often  I  ventured 
 to  ask  Marion  Parvis,  tLie Departmental Administrator  if tLiere was s'::'rrie Way to  keep 
hogs, she replied fielpfuUy ’Over ray  dead  body’. It  did  not  took very  promising,  arnd  Hy  
tire end  of Jon’s firat year, we were  no  rmarer to  cloning  cyctiri. Theel jereeny  MinstluU  
(Figure  4) started  as a  graduate stucient  ice the    laboratory,  arid we  begael  to  
investigate tire ’hybrid  arrest  of translation’ th& we were going  to  neecl to  identif'y  tLie 
eyctin  clonee,  arnd  also perhaps  to  knock  out  cyciin  synthesis  in  sea  urchin

286





























5#u t}memy   II]onm *nPne OIPMN  aa*CxUme  }  ueMoneda



eggs. We got M13 shotgun clones for TMV that Philip Goelet  Lmd used ice fiis determination  of the 
 se'queme of this clamic  virus  (36) , and  begcin  to  test if antisense clones c‹niId  block 
synthesis of TMV  protein  programmed  by viral RNA.  We  very  quickly  discovered  two  things  
First,  tone  circular  M13  DNA needecl to be cut into pie<›es ice order to work (we used Haelll, 
which can cut single-stranded DNA). bond, we discovered ihat ahh‹nigh a clone ihat cor- respon‹3ed 
to tLie extreme 5’ end  of the  viral RNA was pr'eity efficient at pre- venting  protein synthesis, 
 ones that started  fiarther alnng the mRNA Lmrdty Lmd aely eifect at alt — unless one addecl RNase 
H to cut the RNA strmnd of the DNA-RNA  hybrids thai tiad formed. It iurrie'd out  that tLie levels 
of RNase H ice reticulocyte lysates were extremely low, arid tLmt the  hyhrid arresi that had 
previously  beech  reported  us''d  wheat  germ extrcicts,  which  were rich in this enzyme (37) . 
We got sicfe-tracked into doing rather ‹3etailecl smdies on  the in- fiibitioel of  glnbin  
synthesis  by  short oligonucleotides,  defining  timea,  con- centrations, temperatures arid 
specificities (for example, what woukl a single miseriatch dn2) ; theoe were indeed to prove useful 
later.
By tints time, Jonathan  Lmd  made a email cDNA library in  M13 virus from Arfrsos mRNA and  using 
Jeremy‘s protocols found a ciorie tlnat would specifi- cally ablate cyrtin synthesis arriong the 
first 50 or so that he tried. This was nor reaiiy surprising, considering that cyrtin looked as 
though it comprised about Who of the  total synthesis after fertilization. From there, of course, 
it was a fair-

iy simple  matter  to obtain full-tmngtln  Az6scis  cyctiri  ck›ries  by more ooriverr tinriai  
mecins,  and  the  complete  sequence of cyclin  B mnergecl at Christerms 1886  (38),  Hy wfiicln  
time  it  was pomible  to  compare s'equern:es with Spiaufa (cfcim)  cyctin  A,  for  clone  1T55  
had  been  sequenced  by Kevin  Farrell  and Joam  Ruderman  in  188S-4.  The   two  cyctim  showed 
 strong  homology  over tiieir hat  2(D or so residues,  but  looke'd  like nothing in any of  tire 
s'equern:e d&abases at the time. TLiey were ctenriy not  protein  kincioes, although immu- 
nopre'cipitates of cfcim cyctiri A seemed to possess protein kinase activity. Tfiis was difficult 
to interpret witHnut rmich fia Uer charcicterization of the early an- tisera,  and I  do  not  
think  tLie  idea  tLiat cjrclin  might  be associcited  ritln arr other protein that Were a 
protein kiricioe seriously  — or    eseel playfully — entered our mire-   at ifiis          . I 
knew art about  tiieoe developments,  been ise I had stoppecl  teciching  in  Woc«ds  Hole ice 1883 
and  rorke'd  witln  joan  ciuring  tLie summers  of  1984  arnd  1885,  charcicterising  tire  
comings  and  goings or  (la- belled)  cjrclins  charing  ineicmis  in clam oocytes.  We  learned  
how  to  fix  oeUs and observe  chromosomes and to define the points of  no  return for protein 
synthesis  ice  rel&ioel  to  the   various  meintic  and  mitotic  larndermrks.  I  was entered by 
       chzomosorr¥es, and uzz<Iezstood rz¥eiosis pzopezly Taz the   fizst time in rz¥y  IJe. We 
often zzsed pazther¥ogenetzc activation to  look at meiae@, partly becazzse  it e'as more reTiabTe 
than addizzg  sperzrt az¥d      rt{y been  se zt tae    easier to e'at  h       w the  female 
pzonuclei beWved without        oonksiorz of the spezro,  which tended to stick to thet        aee 
of  the  eggs ancl make for less aeathetical    pleasizzg views. We <Iiscovezed,  however, that it 
was importaz¥t to  wash out         calcizmz  @nophore  qzzite early, oz strazzge  things happened 
it      we zzevez Why uzzdezstoocl. Ancl the  A23I87-activated oocytes got stuck at H-›e firet 
mitotic <Izrision. WiWozzt  a secon<I spizt<IIe pole, a mozzastez  florrr¥ed, and  the  oelh 
zemaizzed  in  M-phase  Dior  sery  lozzg  periods,  interesting     with high levels of cycTin  B 
yet Tw  levels of cycTin  A. This e'as seq   zeroinlezzt  of thcit hcippened  when oolclnicine was 
cidded.  What acts very gratifying was that inhibiting  protein synthesis eventually  led to a 
reduction in the level of cyclin B, arid exit from M-phcioe, the  only time tlnat inhibiting 
protein synthesis ever speeded up  oell cycle progression.  I thought  tints acts pretty 
spectacular,  but I don't think rriany  people imderstood. Moreover, I was pleciaod Hy the   
th‹nigfit that oolchicine's stabiliscitinn of  mitotic clnromosneries acts reaUy ‹Jue to stabi- 
lizationof cycliri,  cmd only indirectly  due to inhibition of  tubuliri poiymerise- tion. Nor  
rriany  people  kmew  thatl  Less plecising,  ix›wever,  was the  ciiscovery that tiiere was not a 
perféct oorrelcitinn between tire time of ciiaappecirarioe of tire eycfin in these experiments arid 
the decondenscitinn of  tire chrorrx›aornes
or  tire re-formcition  of  the  Quietens.  There were creamy  other linings going on
that we Were rx›t seeing, cmd interpreting  ci11 tHe curious pherx›merx›lny erm- minuting  the  
meiotic  ciivisions  in  retention  to   the  requirements  for  protein synthesis was quite 
impcmsible. In  many ways tone nioeat experiments we ciici in tix›ae  two summers Were  measuring  
how  long  tHe  proteolysis  window  stayed
open in mitosis in these lovely objects (L39) .       we had  previously foimd in the
seaunchñaegginhñniKngDNA   heñsoomplem@smbihedycñmAandB
aide. be      eels ezztered mitosiy  Nez, cycTin A wezzt away a zzzinute oz two

288

before cyclin  B, which in  ñam scent down abut 30 seconds nr so before tHe clnromoaomes  visibly  
parted at anaphaae.  Protenlyais  thmn  remained  oel for abut 5 minute, after which the cyciins 
coulci cicctinuil&e agciin. be  coukfn’I see aeiy other labelled proteins alnowirig this kind nf  
behm'imir, aitiiough  see bed      IO Bt$B        tLmt if N&ure had invented siacln act enquisiteiy 
specific pro- teoiysis ermchine, it was unlikely th& it we  usm3 exclusixeiy for cyciins, and  we 
wondered, quite rightly as it has much more recently turned mit, if tone ’glue’ that Held sister 
clnromoaomes together  might  not suffer  tire same fate as tHe cyclone. Bui this realm was wild 
specuRtiori. I shnuld c›dd, too, tLmt we near thought tn cHeck if this 5-erfiinite proteniyais 
windnw applied tn anything el8e than cram  mud sect iarchiel egga, for the  simple reasnn that be  
head  no idea if yeast nr buermri cells contained cyclins. Tlnere was a real possibility t1n& 
tfieoe proteins had eyofized  to  oozatzol         rapijd early cleavage oeII  c^pctea of  mazirze
ioWHebnabe eggs ant  me    €ounct nowhere eye.



So  the  elext  gre&  entrance  came  from  a  simple  experiment   hy  Katherine Swenaon  and  
Joan Rudmxrian  in  the  Spring  nf  I B86  (4€1).  They asked  wh& would  happen  if  eyntfmtic  
mRNA  mcn3e  frnm  clone  1T55,  encoding  clam cycliri A, was injected trio a frog ocicyte. The  
muster was extremely gr&ifying, not tn say electrifying, for  the ciocytes beFmvm3 ezactiy as if 
they had  Dren in- jected smith MI'F. ThIB made peopte it   uQ anct take zzote oF cycJin. At the  
same time, the  reaiait was jnizzTing ice terms of MPP for  twn resume. Firat, it was well- known & 
the  time that atage VI frog ciocytn oontairn›d  "pre-          who8e acti- vationhy  a  stmterdose 
 nf  actire  MPF  cfici  riot  require  protein  eyntiieais. Indeed,  the  p&hway  of  activnfinri  
we   quite  mystericnas,  ahhcnagb  it  was siaspeclnd tn involve changes in tHe phcmpHnrylafinn of 
anmething to dn with MPP. Thus, aitiiougfi Kcitherine's spectacular redraft implied th& cycfiri we  
in- deed ieltiermtely irwnlxed  in  the  control nf entry intn M-phase, ii  hinted  that cycliri 
was rather peripheral  to MPP itaelf. ThiB tent&in oonciusioel we  nnly reirik›rcesd  hy clata in  
tone  paper alnredng tLmt clcim cmc3tn, wtiicln also con- tained  pre-MPP, did  not cnrrtain  any 
detnrtable cyclin  A imlil well  after  the fat    appearance of WP.  &obab    it was thing along   
         hnew that  made us for        the  idea  it                  was ”ante-anti-          , 
and  a @tdzzg  Boro a  note- book oI  I08S alzcnas an  attempt to mzdce aezzse oI  Age      in  
these tezmB more

atzmmer oI  T986 lazed  rr¥e ill  BerWTey,  Si      lovia with the  au       rB of 3dizfaizfar 
&c&gy  of fts  f   f,  begirmirig  tn work seriously  nri  tone  oompanioel RnAf                
with Jnhn Wilson. In  tfio8e ciays, nrie head  tn gn tn libraries tn read the liter&ure, arid I was 
luchjr tn get Johm Gerlnart’s bleeding  to use tHe Ilezzt  The    libzazy  up  the  DIII  izz  
Warzley         T.  kurz better svae be       Wu'B
ofTeronedsytoehowmeareudbve     sxmey,whichIesger§eccepted,aod thethoughtTaIxuldgpusome   er 
udmRNAhomRriRosernfu#who thenapo%docWT£redWlkinMnemMoZoo1ogyDymctmeot. We 
guicWyconhrrneUKstherinesmr4]ososreeutusingpMyA’bAfromUmdB































cam  a mud  Mike was surprised,  because in aft his time doing mRNA asserts for the Bay Area 
Commimity,  he Lmd never one    observed oocyte maturation. We followed tints up  with an  
experiment to see if mRNA from A       in eggs made A       in oocytes mature, which ii cfid. 
Creeping back to the  incubator at 10 in the evening to see if it workecl was extrerriety nciughty 
and  thrilling. Here was suspicious evidence that vertebrates probably had cycliris, too: a great 
encour- agement to Jeremy  Minshutt aRer I returned to Cambridge ice Septerriber.  Ii was a littie 
bit surprising that  nobody  had  thought of  looking for the  mRNA for MPF curlier, and  ratLer 
frustrating that there was rio easy way to  take chat- ters furrier without very nuich more work 
along the cloning arid sequencing path. During that summer, both Andrew Murray arid Marc Kirschner 
carrie to the  rented house where we were staying, arid we discussed how to unravel tLie 
relationship  between  cyrtiris  and   MPF.  Andrew‘s  idea  was  mcike  a  cell-free system based 
on  the oele first cfescribe<i by Lohka and  Masui  (41)  that w‹niId test the  ability of.::ycliel 
synthesis to ‘drive“  the  cell cycle. It was impossible to ieriagirie ‹3oing this ice Cambridge,  
and we agreed that be could have a cyclist clone to test as soon as we had  one. Jeremy and  I 
would  concentrate oel tLie antisense approcich, at which we felt we were getting pretty competent.
Caeehil comparison  beineeel the  sea urchin  cyctin B arid clam cyctiri A se- quences showe'd a 
shun stretch of very high homology even at the  DNA level, and  we ‹designed  a miniernHiy  
redimdani antiserise oligonucleotide based on this sequence. A test of this oligonucleotide on a 
variety of starfish, sea urchin and  frog  eriRNA  preparations  sturwed  very  promising  resuks.  
Bands  of  tLie

290

right size went meey. After Chriatmaa, Jeremy came bcick mud within weeks we Lmd  nur first  (shun) 
 frng JUN      €     DW.       ISB Q      t, I  rem  him anci joel Hack tn Ber£zdey tn try tHe 
eBects nf cyclist B and nf the anti nligoruicleo- tideo nn  frcig cmcyte  maturatinn,  urn3er  the  
expert  tuition  of  jofun  Gerhart aod   emu.joo’smbAvorkedbeaut]hidytoioduoe    ennaturmâon, bzzt 
}eremy'B BUt  sezzse ezperimerzts were zzot as  consñn      g  and  we  began  to atzapect  it      
 boga  zzzight  poaaeee  a  larger  zepeztoize  of  cychnB than  we  fact Indeed, hack in  England, 
 jeremy started  collaborating with Aian
Colman  ice Birerérigfmm,  who was xery irrtereated  ice the   MPF story  (mud  ice wlnnse  
iaboratnry Jnfm Sbuttlmvnrth  cloned  the  Cdc2  horriologue  ’MOlS’, which we late lazed to be the 
rig         CDK a     wtzzzg @rzzzse   42) . key    soon
€mzzd  that  although  the  ar¥tiaezzse  oligonucleotides were war      g gem féct   , oozes'  
abzlzty to  be           in   reeporzae  to  progeaterorze  was uzémpaized. was a aetbwk, bzzt not  
 a  tezzzénal setback Wa    alt,J    c^pctizz were         , we
New   that  the oocyteB already oor¥tained  the  protein, ao avg          the  EA
would  not make any différeme. Arnd eze Find  nrify obtained cyclin B cms:

theaciixatiori of MPF. Ii         tO take N          10 QB     tO BDT Ot3t IN    poiDi (43) . let 
fcict, Jeremy kept on isolating and  aequern:ing cyciiel ciorin from Nemipua and  theel testing  
their  rule in cmcyte  m&uratinri  Hy aritisenae aHlatinri.  We stripped  after  BI,  B2  and  Al,  
thereby  missing  B3,  B4,  BS  ar›d  A2  tn  aay nothing  nf               D, E  and  P. We  knew  
thmn  th&  there were more &type cyclins  to  be  foueld.  Jun  Pineo  finished  his  th     B  IM  
March  1887  and  leR Cambridge fur Tony HimteF‘B PDF&Ory at the  Salk Institute with the  
eréaaioel of iderrtiFying tire fiiunael cyclins. He was scion writing hnme with rues of suc- oesa  
(44) . Mesnwfiile,  Nmncy Standart  went  tn RosoofF to  are  if starfish, tHe other great anurce 
of MPF, had  cycling Sure enough, there xeere two rounds of synthesis and  deatructioel  
oorreopoelding to  the  two ineiotic divisions,  ai- rs           QMH                  B        Not 
Necessary for starfish oocyte maturatinel. It is O         UB US        the   disctiB8ions Of  the  
Q8     FB during  that  perk›c4  th&   we were completely ohsemed hy tire question nf  tire 
rel&ionship between cyclins and MPP  (45). Equaiiy cibTnOM IB Ot3F hafflement.

THE CONNECTION WITH YfASTS
As scion  m the  signature sequenoeo nf cyclist were known,  I began scanning protein aequern:en 
ice pcipers aDDut  the  cell cycle, and  also a8king Paul Nurae ifanyoftheñgeriesloohebñkeours 
Thesmmeersweres1wsysnegMim,and DNAseguencdngvsanotumM@wcyhghupthepro:ñQhdofgwieddMB*# feGme.lnfen,3 
      RbâomoninlMmcKñwhnmâlaboreoqwho eponedthatBobBooher’Bmguenoeof    m    Cdcl3omrmpondedtoa 
B<yped.ThIcausedgwstemflementamdacensinamountoffloAdug-
,aBl   BfOrbddentoteMPmdNu=eofhenews,MthoughmluAvould Line it I viaitnrl Ofinrd shortly thereafter. 
As usual, I enquired if aely of timir genes corrnponded  tn cyciins, and  was tnld that they did  
not. I went off on
hoT@ay and   carr¥e baclc to  6r¥d  Boom's  paper izz the    Auguat  mzrober  of the

TO        }ozzzzzaI    46)  , wheze  the  aequerzoe  was  pdf      Dior  all    to   aee,  
althozzgh Are     svae no   rr¥entlorz oI  cychna  Shozt/ aRer, a ootapTe oI  notes brze/zing at- 
tezzt@n to the homology appeared in         t47, 48), and       whole story began to  maize aezzse.
In  1087, Alan Corman  seas teac  ¥tng izz WoodB Hole and organIee›d  a small
where §izn  falter showered  the   Iarr¥ozzs  pictzzW  OF GB and  bred  LokJ’B QWlficaciOW  Of 6W   
     MPF  (40). Their  purest  haJIOUB cozztzéz¥ed  two   baztds  and   d  spTzgre›d  hlstorze  k  
zaae  wâ        .  be     lower  band Had a moTectaTar weight azozzn‹-t 32,0L  I and     H-›e 
larger band svae a sI-›acte srr›alI for  cyc4irz B,  but   I  prozzziaed biro that as aoon  aa we  
Wd   arztzbocl  ee,  we  add
aee  i€ zt svae cycTin, a  pzo           we later Opt  with the  help o€§ean Gmztier   fl0) . It  
tmed ozzt that §izn's lb   and   rrér¥e uaed diRerezzt zecipea for  5@b-poIyaczyT-


Cambridge  and  ice San   Francisco.  In  Cambridge,  jereeny  and  I  erdistml  the

B     theeiB with  care       y  c  ¥rzeen  oTigawcl        Yes  that  had  zzzizdmaT  eI- USB  OF 
the      U            Og other proteizzs in         T       ea     We lozznd  that theee re- agents 
diet not  aRect DNA rephcatiorz, but  did  block Wtry fi-tO WztOBiB  /5t) . Aintree Murray's 
approach xem much bokfer and tHe results mDre impreo8im. Jun  Pineo's sea iarcfiin cyciin clone 
oould ’drive’ sexerai trciins nf cell cycim ice mn RNaxe-treated dencpzzs egg  extrcict, and  
moreomr, if the  N-teriifirnis was re- moval  hy germtic  engineering,  the  cyclin  (f   mouaiy  
knoxen  m  ABO)  cmild drip the eu¥treut  Sta     zzzitoeig  but   BMC  B        TIN  GB            
P   and     the    UWEgJB were stuclc in  M-p           although thee was co       sion — which 
zemaizzs to  this day, in  fcict — about whether the extracts were in melaphme nr anapLmee)  (5 2,
53).
Jdaroel Dome ar›d I have recently cfiscusaed elsewhere how it emerged th& cyclins  and   Cdc2  were 
 partners  (Sd) ,  and   indeed,  Marcel's  purifimtinel  of starfish  MPP,  wtiicln  he   
prnjeclnd  as  a  dried-down  gel  &  a  meeting  in  St. Andrew‘s Unimraity in Scotland in April 
1888  (5S), eat the  aeai nri tire matter aRer  a  period  oI  cord  baton  dzzr  zzg which  theze  
had  beezz  ed          that       c2 alnne was required  fur JdPP activity. Full  resolutinn nf  
tire ermtter came later f'roen Hicichemical  studies nf  the  activatinn  of CDK2 inmlving  ice 
parallel  my Mborflory in padi    RsndyPoon,]brgAchmcse*uBd an0]ohn5huMle
vo1,snutiofMmrelDorée.bfoundtfmtGSTLDC2preñdedbyLi
I  ei Tsai, could be alightiy activated  hy cyclin A, and   tFmt the  activatinn was trerziendously 
erñianced by immiinnprnripitates nr MO15 (56, 42). It was riot too  long before         strzzc&reB 
oI the  oompoUUWB  And of  the  svhoTe oompTm were determined, which explained very chmrly why CDKS 
required cyclists ror

I   have  sciid  rery  little  abut  what  we  tones  frnm  the  yeast  germtic  ap- panache, even 
thmigb we were well aware nf  them. I Pmd  met Lee Hartwel3 when I was still at Einstein, mud km    
 Paul  Nurse quite well rrom the fime he
vncinsu    ButaBIhawmnidecleaqitvrssthesquadccre*#ures,theWann¿
eeaurching f    arud shubsh thstresfly irujpñe0 nne, and the MlureoflMFT































wfiicln attracted me to studying tire oett cycle. It  is interesting to note th& no- ne of the  
classical czk mut&ions in buciding yeast cnrreeporufexl to cyctim  (at tix›ugh Steve Reed, Frecl 
Crow arnd Bruce Futcher quickly  identified them by various ingenious approachm) . Nor cfid the 
crucial CDK  activating  kincise re- veal itself through genetics. In fcict, the  celt cycle field 
in general provided act extrerrieiy  useful meeting pfaoe for the  tiso cultures.
One fincil comment. The cieccn3e starting in about  1886 acts a  fantastic ex- perience for anyone 
working on  tire celt cjrcle. Discoveries emerged from aft sides and  unexpected quarters at a 
Readily bewildering rate. TLie culture was generous and  opeel, and  the  fieid attracted extremely 
taiente'd scientists who were very nuich fun to work with and  talk to. I world  like to  thank 
them. Tfiis Nobel prize horx›urs them aft.

A FOOTNOTE ABOUT GELS
Why  did  noboHy  run  a  time<i series of  'Nmethionirie  labelled  fertilized sea urchin  or  
clam  eggs  oel  a  1-dirr›ensionat  SDS-polyacrylamide  gel  belreeel 1670  and   T9827 One   
arzse'er,  oT cots      ,  @  that  sery  fée'  people  e'or         on tiieoe oells; but  more 
important, perhaps, are simple te'cfmicat reasons. Thus, ice the   fate 186Op Pmit Go      mud his  
cnlkmgum were interested in pcitterns of protein  synthesis  in cleaving  sea  urchin  eggs mud  in 
 mannnaiimn  cell cycles (57-59), but  becmise the  ODS gel had  rx›t yet beech developed, and tone 
slab gel not  quite invente'd,  the  reookitiori  of indivichaal  proteins and  timed compar- isons 
 were  not   possible.  Tone  next  smious  investigator  of  the   question  of

293

whether fertilized  sea urchin eggs synthesized different  proteins horn unfer- tiJized  eggs was 
Bruce  BraridHnrst  in the  mid- l97fh  (60) , by  which rime ihe high-resolution 2-dimeraiomI gel 
system fact been  iztvented  by Pat  O’FarreO (6I). Two seziozzs obstacles stood izz the   may of  
detectzzzg c]/cTirzs on   2-dimer sional gels. First, as we later discovered,  cyclins are  
difficult,  if nut  impossible to  focus in ihe  isoelectric  cfirnensinel  of tLie sysiem,  and  
they appecir  as ugly srriears  if  they appear at alt. Second,  it is riot  easy  to  compcire  
muhiple  2-di- mensional autoradiograrris, arid  the  idea of  taking  rrmriy closely-spaced  time 
points w‹niId be  boih difficuh to retrieve and  rather pointless in order to cidd- ress the  
questions being aske'd at  the  time. I was very  kicks.


REFERENCES
(1)  Bonoon. H. (1966).. Early davaloprn  rit of tnn ecnai‹na egg compare a vlfh erytRro-

.  HH.   (1981).  Assembly  of  W    9epfioa               of            oglobW         .  NW.
4mf. •i    f'Sd 4f  247—261.
(3)  Hum. Ti, Hume: Ti & Munro, fi. (l9ti8). Control of iimmogtotdn syntfiails: dlsteitxi-






(S}


(6}

(7)

(8}


(9}
31—45.
Hum. RJi. Hunts: A.R. & Mumo. fi.J. (IU-H). Control  of Ra  moglobln cynthesls: a dliferance  In 
tRe size of tn   pcfysmnas  maDng alpha and beta  ctmlnx. ñf&n. 220. 4B1—48S.
Lo dlxfi. H.F. & Jm&men, M. (1972). Regulation of nensogtotdn cjmthesli. Equal mtas








Kasoaer.  N.S.,                   , C.A,  Yoga. B   Huuc  T  &  Koeoaar  EJd.  (1975).
Lion oIgmtaizt zyzal¥asia @  gtutatldow  rbsulfide Tn the presence oI gtutatldo-
m.             8¥/  rpm  Duaaern 4S: Bt6-BU
(10) {aclcaom  Rg.. Helen P.Caazg&ll. EN. & Huuc T. (1983). Tina mbas og sugar ghozg-
] BJacen   J7J: 313-324.
Huut. T, Haies. P.Camgbe0. E.A.. D¥g          , C. gz Jwksom  Rg. (1'¥I3}. The tsca of amenity 
ctzcazoatograghy on 2’-5’ADP- Sagharasa  w         a rag      meut rbr NAD9H, tldomdoW and the     
daxizt wductasa gor tI¥a zrudzaan         oI Mgh grot@n Otto- s    actt      & Wbh  NtJctd      a   
sazee. Aza•/. @          13!. 303—31 !.
(12)  Huza. T. & EtzreW¥gd.1    (1971). Cytoplasm          Cobol-tzdécted HaLa c¥gU Tzdzt-


(13)
EI¥renfé£&  E. & Huzit.1    (1971). Doubla-saanoad go8oWua RNA izdzlbita  Hatton
or protein e/nttiesu by retJculucpa gsatee. 4m.  her. Arab. S•J. M'  I 6B. t075-107B.
(14) ›'•          .e   c  j a        zJ. ‹›s cj. a«   ‹saw        x-year        w  «
gstao neat raoculocjta th.       6or/            . 6ñ 247—256.
(IS}  Hunter. T,  He     T..{Tom Rg. gr Robertson. H.D. (1975}. Tea chaactaris0cs oriu-



294

Dambrough. C.H    Lagan. 5.. H-r    T & |accson, IU. (1973}.  lultiadon  or prom
I  o@: Wdanco for za¥asanger DNA- &6qendent bkdIz\g og zo¥   doztg tcanafér
RNA to the t05 rtbruamal sutxuat./       . Biol. 76. 3T3—403.
Lagos S., Brayiay. A   Hunt T & JacIcaon. Rg. {1974). The alléct oil          and réiatea

(1Q


(19)  HeahAo. A.. Maaza  t,  P,  Sids. IL  & Tod. C.M. (1@1}. WToty@c  wzgozzse.
6e/. For    4. 232: 206—2t 1.
Q0)  W&ker. A.T., Hura. T. Jacgsom IL{. gr Anbenon. C.W. (1985). Doulaa-soandad DNA
shock grotain in auimaI cou axoacta. I   fW/. 4. 139—145.

Q1)

aums pnospRoeylation of Sp1 by a DNA-aependnni pmt‹dn ktrmm.  &P   If:   155—1 £S. Jacnson. RJ.. 
Canpbe0. E.4, Herbert. R  £ Htirit, T  (1983). Tns preparation  ana pro-pertias of gel-hit   reef  
rantdt nflmitocjt    tyma protein cfs           emu. Air/.
B             131, 2B9-301.
Q3)  Batting  r, D.  & Htirit,  T   (1981).  Ferhtimflon  of so   urchfn eggs 1s  mcmnp        d by 
413S ribosomal sutiinnlt phospiioeylation. for. BE.  B7, 277—2ES.
Q4
after fartilfza6on of ma iircRln eggs. &r.  Inf. SZ. S10—217.
Rosenthal. E.T   Hurt, T. & Rudmxmn,  J.V  (19&I). Satectlve  translation  of  inRNA


Yfu. M.h   Gaehaic j.C. (1980). Partial purlfuation  asd  ctmacte        on of W 
omtiiradon-pronmting facior front eggx of              /ai0z &r. Ztfif. 1980 Zii 4bS—d77. Murmy. 
A.W.h   Szostan. j.W. (1tH3). Co        ctlon of arhHal cRrmnosoms R  yeast. N&o    ftp: 189—193.
Geehaic J., Yfu. M. & Hncnnar, M. (liRi4). Cell cycle dynamics of an M-pRase-ipna- fic cjtoplmmlc 
factor $n              failsoocytes ana eggx./. OtIBm. R8. l2d7—1255.
Q9)  £sars. T   Huuc T. & Toungblairc  j. (1982). On tea  ro\e or matern& mRNAk   sea

eacR call dlrlsfon cycle. Ref. &#.  J6A 372.
(30)  Smndaic N.M.. Bray. SJ.. Gaoige, E.L.. Hunt, T  s  Rule J.V (US). Tne sman
uonâity raguiataa ‹mtarmt flu     io ‹Jaai ana ma urcran agp.y. cow. Noa tssa—

(31)
gmmbsged6eaqmamnu4mRNAvimauwmnegpWdhdmMopOdaxh
ciaasaga divisioer C&SA 389-S9£.
(33)  Gtotzar, M. Murray. A.W. & ft1r*chm; M.W. (1991). Cyclfn is dngradea t›y tne utdqui- tin 
pathmy. Ndi«e 249: 1S2—12 B.
(33)


(34)

(3/


(3Q
HuttJu,1   (1961). Ttia aDéct oI       om        ozs grotAzt matabo&at anlt coil        Foot ill
rert0izea ea  urchin eggs.             da 17, 4t0-411.
Rosemhzg. IT.    Taruey. TA,   & Club |.1(1983). SaguencaspecJllc aten

anger RNA aRer fartltfzatlon of Sus  fa ooh./. Af f. clef. I £E: 309-327.
Goaiat. R, LomonnsioH,  G.P. Butler. RJ   fiL  m, M.E., Gall. M.J.,  £            J.(1982). N       
otlde  spec of  tobacco  ooh      fim    RNA. for.  Nat Ae  f.  Sd.  f'S1.79: SBI&-5821

(27)  h0nsnuii. j.  0  Hwit, fi  (1985). Tns toe of sfrigte<tranaea DNA ana RNasn H io pro-


(38}

(39}

(40}


(41)  Lohta, MJ.   0  Mann.  'i  (1983).  Formation  n   rd    of s           yowctA  and mltoBc
»nnmo cm    maima by ainpin6ian ooptasmlc cocnponanix.  She      220: 719-721.
(42}

saw p33       aria pS4      . fNfZiO/. 12, 312â—3132.
(43)  Hochegger.  H.   fDo          n  r.  fi..  Hrs,  j..  Hooefl.  M..  to  MDac,  K..  Flatcn  
r.  iC. Dunnn,  T   Sohait  M. &  i-rent.  T   (2fD1).  New  Btype  cyclin qnthasls  1s  imqufrect 
t›atoeen frstech  t ana n aurtng                oocjtn inatiimlloer  for&gene   g 12B, 379S— 3B07.
Pins.  J. & Hunter. fi  (1   'i9).  flotation of a tnnnan cyctfn cDNA: est&nca for cjclln


(4S}
mRNA anA pr&efn rggtilkatlon
SB: B33—846.
tn   celt cycla and for fnieractfon  wlm p34"^. If.



(46}



(48}
(49}



(SI}
















296

dianuu                   possible Interaction of the gone prnauct with crdcrotiitxiles. EMBO
7: 2321       ZT.
5o\oman. M.. Booher. R   Mnclu›ar, M. € Ben      D (1988}. Oycun &  floion pasL Ger

Goabt M s  Byees, B. (1988). Cyclin in faston yuan. OU S4'. 738-740.
Lofts, MJ.. Hayes, M.R. & Maliar, JR.  (1988). Rrutficatlon of maturation-pronmtlng

3009—S012.
Gautfar, I-  Minxhtfl, J., Lottf   , M.. Glcfmr. M., Hum. T. & Manar. j.L. (1990). Chain






2B0—2tE.
Dome, M. & Htirit, T  (ZD2). Frons Cdc2 to Cdkl: v        Rd tne tali cycle kinase Join ttx cjciin 
partmr7/. C  f Sd.  JJS. 24t›1—24tid.
LanhA,  j.  C..   Capon$  j.  P.  Caput. D.. C  sadora.  J. C..  Derarcorui.  J    Kagfiact,  M..



S  tdtlesozth . {., Dad, M. gz Casadore  {C. (IQ. Tea MOt5 gene encodes the ca- tats subtzrdt oI  a 
gmtaizt Tizzase  that actt'/atas c&2   azzd otl¥ar       Wdegandant  U- rns    (CDES). ttcougrt 
$hosgharyJadon or Ttirt6l  auA ita hornologuas.  fifi‹fBOQ. t2: 3ttt—3121.

(S7)

(58)



(f›O)
(61)

beyc  . D. Tne calculanon  of atouhte rates. &r&ef. 2J, I25—146.

beyc  . t. Uptake W    fncorporatlon of amino mñ    a«u«g w   M    cleavage cycle. &r.
