               Artemisinin—A Gift from Traditional
               Chinese Medicine to the World
               Nobel Lecture, December 7, 2015

               by Tu Youyou
               Institute of Chinese Materia Medica, China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences, Beijing, China.



               Dear respected Chairman, General Secretary, Esteemed Nobel Laureates, Ladies and
               Gentlemen,

               It is my great honor to give this lecture today at Karolinska Institute. The title of
               my presentation is: Artemisinin—A Gift from Traditional Chinese Medicine to
               the World.
                    I would like to thank the Nobel Assembly and the Nobel Foundation for
               awarding me the 2015 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. This is not only an
               honor for myself, but also a recognition and motivation for all scientists in China.
               I would also like to express my sincere appreciation for the great hospitality of the
               Swedish people which I have received during my short stay over the last few days.
                    Thanks to Dr. William C. Campbell and Dr. Satoshi Omura for their excel-
               lent and inspiring presentations. The story I will tell today is about the diligence
               and dedication of Chinese scientists during the search for antimalarial drugs
               from traditional Chinese medicine forty years ago under considerably under-
               resourced research conditions.


               Introduction

               Malaria
               Malaria has long been a devastating and life-threatening global epidemic dis-
               ease in human history. Hippocrates, a Greek physician, described the disease as

                                                                                                                 283




ook.indb 283                                                                                                           5/12/16 1:55 PM


           284                                                               The Nobel Prizes


           “marsh fevers,” “agues,” “tertian fevers,” “quartan fevers,” and “intermitten fevers”
           in his treatise “On Airs, Waters, and Places” in 400 B.C. [1]. A detailed descrip-
           tion of malaria symptoms can also be found in 黄帝内经 (Huangdi Neijing, the
           Inner Canon of the Yellow Emperor, written around the time of the Chun Qiu and
           Qin Dynasties, 770–207 B.C.), the earliest traditional Chinese medical literature
           source [2].
               Since malaria commonly originated and spread in humid areas surround-
           ing marshes and swamps, the disease was considered associated with “bad air”
           hovering around the region, which is how the word “malaria,” a combination of
           Medieval Italian “mal” (bad) and “aria” (air), was derived [3].
               It was not known that the disease was caused by parasites until the French
           scientist Charles Louis Alphonse Laveran discovered the single-celled Plasmo-
           dium parasite in blood smears from malaria patients in 1880 [4]. In 1897, Ronald
           Ross, a British military doctor, found Plasmodium “eggs,” oocysts, in the guts
           of female mosquitoes and late verified that Anopheles mosquitoes were respon-
           sible for transmission of malaria parasites between subjects [5]. These findings
           explained how the disease was transferred from malaria patients to the healthy
           population through a vector—female Antopheles mosquitoes. Both Laveran and
           Ross received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in recognition of their
           exceptional contribution in understanding the origins of malaria.
               There are over a hundred species of Plasmodium. Five of them infect humans,
           among which Plasmodium malariae, Plasmodium ovale, Plasmodium vivax, and
           deadly Plasmodium falciparum cause malaria whereas Plasmodium knowlesi
           hardly poses any threat to humans. Camillo Golgi, an Italian scientist and Nobel
           Laureate, raised an idea for differentiation of the Plasmodium species in 1886
           when he demonstrated the correlation between the periodicity of paroxysms (the
           chill and fever pattern in the patient) with the 72-hour life cycle of development
           of Plasmodium malariae. In observing 48-hour cycles of development from other
           patients, he came to the conclusion that there must be more than one species of
           malaria parasite responsible for these different patterns of cyclical infection [6].
               Human malaria symptoms are closely associated with the complex life cycle
           of malaria parasites. Malaria parasites present as sporozoites, merozoites, game-
           tocytes, gametes and oocysts through their life cycle either in the vector (the
           definitive host) or in the infected subjects, e.g. humans (the secondary host).
           Healthy individuals are infected by an invasion of the thread-like sporozoites
           following a mosquito bite. The sporozoites then, through blood circulation, enter
           the liver cells where each sporozoite develops into a schizont containing thou-
           sands of tiny rounded merozoites over a period of one or two weeks. The schizont
           releases the merozoites into the bloodstream when it matures and bursts. For




ook.indb 284                                                                                       5/12/16 1:55 PM


               Artemisinin—A Gift from Traditional Chinese Medicine to the World285


               some malaria species, for example, Plasmodium vivax and Plasmodium ovale,
               some sporozoites will develop into hypnozoites, which can reside in the liver for
               months or years before developing into schizonts. This causes relapses in infected
               people. The merozoites, once they have escaped from the liver cells to the blood
               stream, are taken up by the red blood cells where they asexually produce new
               infective merozoites until the red cells burst, which initiates another round of
               asexual multiplication. Some of the merozoites develop into gametocytes that,
               once taken by female Anopheles mosquitoes through blood meal, mature to form
               sperm-like male gametes or large, egg-like female gametes. Fertilization of gam-
               etes produces an oocyst filled with infectious sporozoites in the mosquitoes’ guts.
               The oocyst then bursts and releases sporozoites, which migrate to mosquitoes’
               salivary glands, ready to attack their next victim. Since all forms of Plasmodium
               parasites are hidden in either the liver or red blood cells during most of their life
               cycles, they are well camouflaged from the immune system. This makes it more
               challenging to trigger a defense through either a natural immune response or
               vaccination [7].
                   Treatment of malaria relies on chemotherapy, using medicines that act on
               various phases of Plasmodium parasite life cycles. These medicines include quin-
               oline compounds, sulfadoxine/pyrimethamine, mefloquine (Lariam), lumefan-
               trine, doxycycline, artemisinin and artemisinin-based combination therapies
               (ACTs). The most commonly used ACTs consist of an artemisinin component
               plus other antimalarial drugs such as mefloquine (ASMQ), lumefantrine (Coar-
               tem), amodiaquine (ASAQ), piperaquine (Duo-Cotecxin), and pyronaridine
               (Pyramax).
                   Vector control such as use of insect repellants, insecticide-treated mosquitoes
               nets (INTs), indoor residual spraying as well as elimination of stagnant water
               etc. is still the main approach for malaria prevention, although some malaria
               vaccines are under development. Some preventative medicines, for example,
               chloroquine, doxycycline, mefloquine (Lariam), primaquine, and a combina-
               tion of atovaquone and proguanil (Malarone) may be used should prophylaxis
               be deemed necessary [8].
                   To promote early diagnosis and effective treatment of malaria, the World
               Health Organization (WHO) published the third edition of its Guidelines for the
               treatment of malaria in April 2015. The organization recommends that “All cases
               of suspected malaria be confirmed using parasite-based diagnostic testing (either
               microscopy or rapid diagnostic test) before administering treatment. Results of
               parasitological confirmation can be available in 30 minutes or less. Treatment
               solely on the basis of symptoms should only be considered when a parasitological
               diagnosis is not possible” [9].




ook.indb 285                                                                                           5/12/16 1:55 PM


           286                                                            The Nobel Prizes


               In addition, in order to address the increasing incidences of artemisinin-
           tolerant or -resistant malaria, the WHO issued its Global Plan for Artemisinin
           Resistance Containment (GPARC) and Emergency Response to Artemisinin Resis-
           tance in the Greater Mekong Subregion in which a systematical tier approach is
           recommended via situational management in controlling, containing and elimi-
           nating occurrence and spread of artemisinin-resistant malaria [10–11].
               “Expanding access to artemisinin-based combination therapies (ACTs) in
           malaria-endemic countries has been integral to the remarkable recent success in
           reducing the global malaria burden. No alternative antimalarial medicine is cur-
           rently available offering the same level of efficacy and tolerability as ACTs. The
           emergence of artemisinin resistance in the Greater Mekong subregion (GMS) is
           therefore a matter of great concern. Resistance to other antimalarial medicine
           was also detected first in GMS, eventually appearing elsewhere. In Africa there is
           evidence that the spread of resistance coincided with increases in child mortality
           and morbidity” [9].

           Traditional Chinese medicine’s views on malaria
           Malaria was known as a disease by our Chinese ancestors long time ago. A
           Chinese character inscription 疟 (malaria in Chinese) was found in the oracle
           ruins from between 1401 and 1122 B.C. Comprehensive descriptions on malaria
           symptoms, epidemics and relief of its unique periodic fevers and chills were pro-
           vided in subsequent ancient medical literature, such as 周礼 (Zhou Li, a classical
           book in ancient China, the Zhou Dynasty, 1046–256 B.C.), 黄帝内经 (The Inner
           Canon of the Yellow Emperor, from around the time of the Chun Qiu and Qin
           Dynasties, 770–207 B.C.), 金匮要略 (The Synopsis of Prescriptions of the Golden
           Chamber, the Han Dynasty, 206 B.C–220 A.D.), 诸病源候论 (On Causes and
           Symptoms of Diseases, the Sui Dynasty, 581–618 A.D.), 千金方 (Qian Jin Fang)
           and 外台密要 (Wai Tai Mi Yao) (the Tang Dynasty, 618–907 A.D.), 痎疟论疏 (a
           book on malaria, the Ming Dynasty, 1368–1644 A.D.) and 瘴疟指南 (Malignant
           Malaria Guide, the Qing Dynasty, 1644–1911 A.D.). Several ancient texts from
           the central Asian countries, Assyria and India also described some basic features
           of malaria.
               In fact, traditional Western and Chinese medicine agreed on their basic
           understanding of malaria. Our Chinese ancestors believed that malaria was
           caused by an invasion of 外邪 (exogenous evil) into the human body. The term
           “exogenous evil” was further explained as 疟气 (malaria gas), 疟邪 (pathogen of
           malaria disease), 瘴毒 and 瘴气 (miasm, miasma). This consensus remained in
           traditional Chinese medicine for more than two thousand years since it was first




ook.indb 286                                                                                    5/12/16 1:55 PM


               Artemisinin—A Gift from Traditional Chinese Medicine to the World287


               described in 黄帝内经 (in the Inner Canon of the Yellow Emperor, from around
               the time of the Chun Qiu and Qin Dynasties, 770–207 B.C.). Similarly, in the
               medieval period, Western medical practitioners believed that inhaling rotten
               gases from marshes and swamps was the cause of malaria.
                   Malaria was one of the epidemic diseases with the most comprehensive
               records in traditional Chinese medical literature. For example, 普济方 (Pu Ji
               Fang, Prescription for Universal Relief, the Ming Dynasty, 1368–1644 A.D.), one
               of the most comprehensive Chinese medicine prescription texts, contained at
               least four chapters entitled 诸疟门 (Chu Nue Men) on malaria.

               The herb Qinghao
               The term “Qinghao” is a general synonym in Chinese for the herbs in the Arte-
               misia family.
                    Qinghao is one of the most common herbs that have been prescribed in tra-
               ditional Chinese medical practice for over two thousand years. In Chinese medi-
               cal terms, it offers the functions of clearing deficient heat, cooling and detoxify-
               ing blood, eliminating osteopyrexia and fever, freeing from summer heat, ceasing
               the recurrence of malaria fevers, removing jaundice, etc.
                    In 神农本草经 (Sheng Nong’s Herbal Classic, the Qin and Han Dynasty,
               around 221 B.C. to 220 A.D.), the oldest herbal classic in China, Qinghao was
               listed in an inferior category under the name of 草蒿 with a description of having
               an inherent nature of “bitterness and cold” and its main clinical application was
               in relieving itches caused by scabies and scabs, treating malignant sores, killing
               lice, retaining warmth in joints, and improving visual acuity [12].
                    Although the herb Qinghao was documented in the traditional Chinese
               medical literature, however, few details were given on either the species or the
               effective parts of the plant when clinical application was mentioned.
                    According to plant taxonomy, there are at least six species in the Artemisia
               family: Artemisia annua L., Artemisia apiacea Hance, Artemisia scoparia Waldst.
               et kit., Artemisia capillaries Thunb., Artemisia japonica Thunb., and Artemisia
               eriopoda Bunge. Our studies confirmed that only Artemisia annua L. contains
               meaningful quantities of artemisinin [13].
                    Relief of malaria symptoms, i.e. periodic fevers using Qinghao was first
               recorded by 葛洪 (Ge Hong) in 肘后备急方 (A Handbook of Prescriptions for
               Emergencies, the East Jin Dynasty, around 317–420 A.D.). The application was
               subsequently mentioned in other literature such as 圣济总录 (Sheng Ji Zonglu,
               General Records of Holy Universal Relief, the Song Dynasty, 960–1279 A.D.), 丹
               溪心法 (Danxi Xinfa, Danxi, Mastery of Medicine, the Yuan Dynasty, 1271–1368




ook.indb 287                                                                                          5/12/16 1:55 PM


           288                                                            The Nobel Prizes


           A.D.), 普济方 (Pu Ji Fang, Prescription for Universal Relief, the Ming Dynasty,
           1368–1644 A.D.) in which Qinghao soup, Qinghao pills for malaria relief, and
           Qinghao powders were described for relieving malaria symptoms. In addition
           to a summary of experience from earlier practitioners, 李时珍 (Li Shi Zhen)
           recorded his own practice in treating periodic “fevers and colds” in 本草纲目
           (Compendium of Materia Medica, the Ming Dynasty, 1368–1644). Malaria-
           related information could also be found in 本草备要 (Essentials of Materia
           Medica, the Qing Dynasty, 1644–1911 A.D.) and 温病条辨 (Detailed Analysis of
           Epidemic Warm Diseases, the Qing Dynasty, 1644–1911 A.D.).
               In addition to the documentation in the traditional Chinese medical lit-
           erature, some empirical formulas was also very popular in some regions, for
           example, a recipe from Jiangsu province mentioned collecting Qinghao leaves
           on the day of 端午 (The Dragon Boat Festival) and drying them in the shade,
           mixing with equal amount of cortex cinnamomi powders, taking 一钱 (a weight
           unit, equal to approximately 3.72 grams) together with warm wine when having
           colds and with cold wine when having fevers in 五更 (time traditionally used in
           China, 3 to 5 a.m.) on the day of a malaria episode, avoiding stimulating foods
           while taking medicines “ to reduce malaria symptoms.”
               No doubt, clinical practice in alleviating malaria symptoms utilizing Qin-
           ghao—inherited from traditional Chinese medical literature—provided some
           useful information leading to the discovery of artemisinin.


           Discovery of Artemisinin

           Background
           Malaria was effectively treated and controlled by chloroquine and quinolines
           for a long period of time until development of drug resistant malaria in the late
           1960s following the catastrophic failure of a global attempt to eradicate malaria.
           Resurgence of malaria and rapidly increased mortality due to loss of effective
           treatment presented a serious global challenge, in particular, in the regions with
           prevalence of malaria associated with the drug resistant Plasmodium parasites,
           especially Plasmodium falciparum.
                South East Asia was one of the most severe endemic areas in the late 1960s.
           As reported, during the Vietnam War, casualties in the US military force caused
           by medical disability due to the full seasonal prevalence of malaria reached four
           to five times higher than casualties from actual direct combat in 1964. Malaria
           infected nearly half of total military individuals or around five hundred thousand
           US soldiers in 1965. Fighting malaria became one of the top medical priorities




ook.indb 288                                                                                    5/12/16 1:55 PM


               Artemisinin—A Gift from Traditional Chinese Medicine to the World289


               and challenges for the US Army in Vietnam. A program coordinated through
               the Division of Experimental Therapeutics at the Walter Reed Army Institute of
               Research (WRAIR) in Washington, DC was launched to search for new anti-
               malarial drugs. The program involved numerous research institutes and a vast
               investment. Up to 1972, over 214,000 compounds were screened by the Walter
               Reed Army Institute of Research which, however, ended up with no break-
               through findings or discoveries of novel antimalarial medicines.
                   Confidential antimalarial research was initiated within the Chinese military
               in 1964. Research on novel antimalarial medicines became an important political
               assignment for the medical researchers in the Chinese army.
                   A national office for malaria control, known as the 523 Office (for purposes
               of confidentiality, the project was named for May 23, the date when it was initi-
               ated; the Office was terminated in March 1980) was established in 1967 with a
               mission of organizing and coordinating antimalarial drug research activities in
               seven provinces and cities across the country. Several thousand compounds were
               screened between 1967 and 1969. However, no effective antimalarial drugs were
               identified [15].

               Initial screening
               In 1969, two directors and one member from the National Project 523 Office
               visited the Institute of Chinese Materia Medica of the Academy of Traditional
               Chinese Medicine, seeking help in searching for novel antimalarial drugs from
               Chinese medicines. I was appointed by the leadership team at the Academy of
               Traditional Chinese Medicine to build and head the Project 523 research group
               at the institute.
                   I started by collecting information on the relevant traditional Chinese medi-
               cines. Within three months, I gathered over two thousand herbal, animal and
               mineral prescriptions for either internal or external uses by reviewing ancient
               traditional Chinese medical literatures and folk recipes, and interviewing expe-
               rienced Chinese medical practitioners for potential prescriptions and herbal
               recipes. I then narrowed down the prescriptions from two thousand to 640 and
               summarized the recipes in a brochure entitled 抗疟单秘验方集 (“Antimalarial
               Collections of Recipes and Prescriptions”). I circulated copies of the brochure
               to other research groups outside the institute for reference through the National
               Project 523 Office in April 1969.
                   We started with experiments on dichroine using animal models. The study
               was soon abandoned due to its severe side effects. From May 1969, aqueous
               and ethanol extracts of over hundred herbs were prepared and tested in rodent




ook.indb 289                                                                                       5/12/16 1:55 PM


           290                                                              The Nobel Prizes




           Figure 1. Copy of a paragraph from the summary of the National Malaria Control
           Research Meeting, issued by the National Leading Group Office for Malaria Control on
           June 1, 1971.


           malaria with few promising results found up to June 1971. The paragraph in
           the summary of national malaria control research meeting shown on Figure
           1 updated the antimalarial drug research, saying that “over a hundred clinical
           verifications were conducted; some of the (herbal medicines) showing some
           clinical relevance has been further tested locally, including herbal dichodrae, ktze
           cycleanine, talon, ball atrazine, clerodendron serratum, red and white arsenic pills
           etc” [16].

           Extract Sample No 191 and Focus on Qinghao Research
           We started to focus on the herb Qinghao in 1971 but achieved no promising
           results after multiple experiments. In September 1971, a modified procedure
           was designed to reduce the extraction temperature by immersing or distilling
           Qinghao using ethyl ether. The extracts we obtained were then treated with an
           alkaline solution to retain the neutral portion by removing acidic impurities.
               In the experiments carried out on October 4, 1971, sample No. 191, i.e. the
           neutral portion of the Qinghao ethyl ether extract, was found 100% effective on
           rodent malaria when administered orally at a dose of 1.0 g/kg for three consecu-
           tive days (Figure 2). The same results were observed when tested in malaria-
           infected monkeys between December 1971 and January 1972. This breakthrough
           finding became a critical step in the discovery of artemisinin.
               In the same studies, extracts from air potato yam, pomegranate, rhizoma smi-
           lacis glabrae, and extract of Qinghao using other solvents were also tested with
           negative or no comparable results.
               I reported our findings at the nationwide Project 523 meeting held in Nan-
           jing on March 8, 1972, saying that “We have screened over a hundred types of
           single and combination herbal recipes since July 1971 and found that Qinghao
           ether extract showed 95–100% inhibition of rodent malaria. We performed fur-
           ther purification to retain the effective neutral portion by removing the non-
           effective toxic acidic portion. We observed the same efficacy when we tested the




ook.indb 290                                                                                      5/12/16 1:55 PM


               Artemisinin—A Gift from Traditional Chinese Medicine to the World291




               Figure 2. Copy of the original laboratory notebook record showing 100% inhibition of
               the malaria parasite by Qinghao neutral extract when testing on a rodent malaria model.



               Qinghao ether extract and the neutral portion on the monkey malaria model in
               late December.” (Figure 3)
                    This report attracted overwhelming interests and triggered nationwide col-
               laboration in research on Qinghao and Qinghao extracts. We received multiple
               letters from other institutes requesting that we share information on our find-
               ings and experience [17], to which we responded with thorough explanations
               (Figure 4).




               Figure 3. Copy of a paragraph of Tu Youyou’s presentation at the 523 Project meeting
               held on March 8, 1972.




ook.indb 291                                                                                             5/12/16 1:55 PM


           292                                                                   The Nobel Prizes




                                                     
           Figure 4. Copy of the letters from the Shandong Institute of Parasitic Diseases (left) and
           Yunnan Provincial Institute of Materia Medica (right) requesting sharing of information
           on the findings made by the team at the Institute of Chinese Materia Medica, Academy
           of Traditional Chinese Medicine.


           First clinical trial on Qinghao extract and nationwide collaboration in subsequent
           development
           We subsequently carried out a clinical trial between August and October 1972 in
           Hainan province (twenty-one cases) and simultaneously at Beijing 302 hospital
           (nine cases). This was the first time the neutral Qinghao ethyl ether extract was
           tested in humans. In the trial carried out in Hainan province, a total of twenty-
           one local and migrant malaria patients, nine infected by Plasmodium falciparum
           and eleven infected by Plasmodium vivax, were treated in three dose groups and
           all of them recovered from the fevers with full clearance of malaria parasites. All
           nine patients were successfully treated at Beijing 302 hospital. The results from
           the first clinical trial in Hainan and Beijing 302 hospital were reported in the
           nationwide project 523 meeting held in Beijing in November 1972. The national
           office for malaria control issued a communication on malaria control research
           on November 5, 1972 to record the clinical findings (Figure 5).

                  “In the expedited clinical trial on the twenty-one cases of local and
                  migrant malaria patients in August, the Qinghao extract from the
                  Beijing (research) district showed relatively good efficacy (over




ook.indb 292                                                                                            5/12/16 1:55 PM


               Artemisinin—A Gift from Traditional Chinese Medicine to the World293




               Figure 5. Copy of a paragraph from the communication on malaria control research
               issued by the National Leading Group Office for Malaria Control on November 5, 1972.


                    90%) against Plasmodium vivax and Plasmodium falciparum.
                    This is a promising antimalarial drug with potential for further
                    improvement” [18].

                   Proving the efficacy of neutral Qinghao ethyl ether extract in the experiments
               on rodent and monkey malaria models in October 1971 and the subsequent
               clinical trial between August and October 1972 steered nationwide antimalarial
               research towards Qinghao.
                   Figure 6 summarizes the antimalarial research program carried out by the
               team at the Institute of Chinese Materia Medica, Academy of Traditional Chinese




               Figure 6. Summary of the work completed by the research team at the Institute of Chi-
               nese Materia Medica, Academy of Traditional Chinese Medicine (boxes with blue back-
               ground). Work completed through collaboration between the Institute of Chinese Materia
               Medica and other institutes (Boxes transitioning from blue to white), and work completed
               through collaboration between other research teams across the nation (boxes in white).




ook.indb 293                                                                                              5/12/16 1:55 PM


           294                                                             The Nobel Prizes


           Medicine in which the programs highlighted in blue were accomplished by the
           team at the Institute of Chinese Materia Medica while the programs highlighted
           in blue and white were completed through the joint efforts by the teams at the
           Institute of Chinese Materia Medica and other institutes. Other research teams
           across the nation collaboratively completed the non-highlighted programs.
               The team at the Institute of Chinese Materia Medica independently com-
           pleted screening on Qinghao herbal extracts, and herb Qinghao (Artemisia
           annua L. more specifically), proved the efficacy of neutral Qinghao ethyl ether
           extract (Sample No 191) in animal models in October 1971, completed the first
           clinical trial and proved the clinical efficacy of neutral Qinghao ethyl ether
           extract between August and October 1972, isolated and discovered artemisinin
           in November 1972, completed the first clinical trial on artimisinin between
           September and October 1973, discovered dihydroartemisinin, completed devel-
           opment activities, applied for and received artemisinin new drug approval in
           1986 and dihydroartemisinin new drug approval in 1992. We collaborated with
           other institutes nationwide on extended clinical trials between 1973 and 1978,
           determination of the stereo structure of artemisinin, research on dihydroarte-
           misinin derivatives, searches for Qinghao resources, optimization of manufac-
           turing techniques, and research on new indications for dihydroartemisinin after
           2003. Other institutes across the country synthesized and developed a number of
           artemisinin derivatives, i.e. artemeter, artesunate and arteether into new drugs.


           Purification of artemisinin and chemistry studies
           We started further isolation and purification of neutral Qinghao ethyl ether
           extract parallel with the clinical trial and verification. In August 1972, we
           observed a good separation of the purified neutral extract by silica gel thin-layer
           chromatography. In November 1972, an effective antimalarial compound was
           isolated from the neutral Qinghao ethyl ether extract by the team at the Insti-
           tute of Chinese Materia Medica. The compound was later named artemisinin or
           Qinghaosu in Chinese.
               We started to determine the chemical structure of artemisinin in December
           1972 through elemental analysis, spectrophotometry, mass spectrum, polarimet-
           ric analysis and other techniques.
               The compound was further purified with different re-crystallization pro-
           cesses and tested at the department of analytical chemistry of the Institute of
           Materia Medica, China Academy of Medical Sciences. Based on the elemental
           analysis and results from other studies, colleagues at the Institute of Material
           Medica verified that the compound contained no nitrogen and had a potential




ook.indb 294                                                                                     5/12/16 1:55 PM


               Artemisinin—A Gift from Traditional Chinese Medicine to the World295


               formula of C15H22O5 on April 27, 1973 (Figure 7). We started collaboration
               with the Shanghai Institute of Organic Chemistry and the Institute of Biophys-
               ics of Chinese Academy of Sciences on artemisinin chemical structure analysis
               in 1974. The stereo-structure was finally determined by X-ray crystallography,
               which verified that artemisinin was a new sesquiterpene lactone containing a
               peroxy group (Figures 8 and 9). This was one of the first applications reported
               in China in determining an absolute molecular configuration utilizing the scat-
               tering effects of oxygen atoms by X-ray diffraction technique [19, 20]. Table
               1 presents some of the physical and chemical test results for artemisinin
               chemical and stereo structure determination. The stereo structure of
               artemisinin was pub-lished in 1977 and cited by Chemical Abstracts [20, 21].




               Figure 7. The elements analysis report by the collaborative institution, the Institute of
               Matria Medica, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, on April 27, 1973.




ook.indb 295                                                                                               5/12/16 1:55 PM


           296                                                                 The Nobel Prizes




           Figure 8. Three-dimensional electron density of the artemisinin crystal [20].




           Figure 9. Chemical and stereo structures of artemisinin.




ook.indb 296                                                                                       5/12/16 1:56 PM


               Artemisinin—A Gift from Traditional Chinese Medicine to the World297


               Table 1. Determination of chemical and stereo structure of artemisinin

               Test                     Result
               Appearance               White, needle shape crystaslline
               Melting point            156–157 °C
               Optical rotation         [α]17D: +66.3 °
               High resolution mass     m/z 282.1472 [M]+
               spectrum
               Elemental analysis       C: 63.72%, H: 7.86%
               UV absorption            –
               Solubility               Readily soluble in chloroform, acetone, ethyl acetate,
                                        benzene
                                        Soluble in ethanol, ethyl ether
                                        Slightly soluble in cold petroleum ether
                                        Insoluble in water
               IR (KBr)                 1745cm–1, 831cm–1, 881cm–1, 1115cm–1
               1
                   H-NMR                (CCl4, 100M Hz, Hexamethyl disiloxane) δ: 0.93 (doublet,
                                        J=*6Hz), 1.06 (doublet,J=6Hz),1.36 (singlet),3.08–3.44
                                        (multiplet)
               13
                   C-NMR                (Chloroform, 22.63M Hz) δ: 12,19,23 (quartlet),
                                        25,25.1,37,35.5 (triplet), 32.5,33,45,50,93.5 (doublet),
                                        79.5,105,172 (singlet)
               X-ray crystallography    Crystallographic parameters: D24—P212121
                                        Lattice constant: a = 24.098 Å, b = 9.468 Å, c = 6.399 Å,
                                        Measured density: do = 1.30 g/cm3
                                        Calculated density: dc = 1.294 g/cm3
                                        Number of molecules in an asymmetric unit: 4



               Artemisinin structure—efficacy correlation and artemisinin derivatives
               In order to determine the functional groups in the artemisinin molecule, we
               chemically modified the peroxyl and carboxyl groups of the molecule.
                    We produced deoxyartemisinin through reduction of the peroxyl group to an
               epoxy group by subjecting the artemisinin in the palladium and calcium carbon-
               ate methanol solution under room temperature and pressure, and then treating
               it using an acetone and n-hexane mixture.
                    We also produced dihydroartemisinin by reducing the carboxyl group to
               a hydroxyl group using sodium borohydride. Dihydroartemisinin was further
               reduced to dihydro-deoxyartemisinin by reacting in a palladium and calcium
               carbonate methanol solution.




ook.indb 297                                                                                        5/12/16 1:56 PM


           298                                                              The Nobel Prizes




           Figure 10. Structure—Activity relationship of compounds derived from artemisinin.



                Some new compounds were obtained by derivatizing through the hydroxyl
           group of dihydroartemisinin.
                Figure 10 shows the effective doses and observation in clearance of malaria
           parasites when the structure-modified compounds were administered. The
           results showed that the dose was reduced from 50–100 mg/kg/day for artemis-
           inin to 12.5 mg/kg/day and 6 mg/kg/day for dihydroartemisinin and acetate of
           dihydroartemisinin. The dose was similar between deoxyartemisinin and arte-
           misinin. However, deoxyartemisinin was unable to clear malaria parasites. This
           study verified that the peroxyl group in the artemisnin molecule was critical for
           its antimalarial function while reducing the carboxyl group to hydroxyl group
           improved the efficacy as well as allowed derivatization of artemisinin to form
           new compounds. This led to the development of dihydroartemisinin and other
           compounds such as artemether, artesunate, and arteether into new antimalarial
           drugs (Figure 11). Up to now, no clinical application has been reported with
           other artemisinin derivatives except for the four presented here.

           New antimalaria medicines—artemisinin and dihydroartemisinin
           The team at the Institute of Chinese Materia Medica carried out a series of
           development activities on the chemistry, pharmacology, pharmacokinetics and
           stability of artemisinin and dihydroartemisinin and performed clinical trials




ook.indb 298                                                                                    5/12/16 1:56 PM


               Artemisinin—A Gift from Traditional Chinese Medicine to the World299




               Figure 11. Artemisinin and artemisinin derivatives.


               according to regulatory requirements. The China Ministry of Health granted an
               Artemisinin New Drug Certificate (Figure 12, left) to the Institute of Chinese
               Materia Medica in 1986 and a Dihydroartemisinin New Drug Certificate (Figure
               12, right) in 1992, respectively. Dihydroartemisinin is ten times more potent than
               artemisinin clinically, again demonstrating the “high efficacy, rapid action and
               low toxicity” of the drugs in the artemisinin category.




                                                        
               Figure 12. The Artemisinin New Drug Certificate granted in 1986 (left) and the Dihy-
               droartemisinin New Drug Certificate granted in 1992 (right).




ook.indb 299                                                                                          5/12/16 1:56 PM


           300                                                                The Nobel Prizes




           Figure 13. Delegates to the 4th Meeting of The SWG-Chemal “Qinghaosu” held by the
           World Health Organization (WHO), the World Bank and United Nations Development
           Program (UNDP) in Beijing in 1981.



           Worldwide attention to artemisinin
           The World Health Organization (WHO), the World Bank and United Nations
           Development Program (UNDP) held the 4th joint Malaria Chemotherapy Sci-
           ence Working Group meeting in Beijing in 1981 (Figure 13). A series of presen-
           tations on artemisinin and its clinical application, including my report “Studies
           on the Chemistry of Qinghaosu,” received positive and enthusiastic responses.
           In the 1980s, several thousand malaria patients were successfully treated with
           artemisinin and its derivatives in China.


           Discovery of Artemisinin Was Not an Easy Win

           After this brief review, you may comment that this is no more than an ordinary
           drug discovery process. However, it was not a simple and easy journey in the
           discovery of the artemisinin from Qinghao, a Chinese herbal medicine with over
           two thousand years of clinical application, especially in the 1970s when research
           was significantly under-resourced in China.

           Commitment to a clearly defined goal assures success in discovery
           The Institute of Chinese Materia Medica of the Academy of Traditional Chi-
           nese Medicine joined the antimalarial drug research Project 523 in 1969. I was
           appointed the head to build the Project 523 research group at the institute by the




ook.indb 300                                                                                      5/12/16 1:56 PM


               Artemisinin—A Gift from Traditional Chinese Medicine to the World301




               Figure 14. Screen shot from the TV program “To Develop and Provide the Best Drugs
               for People around the World.”


               academy’s leadership team and was in charge of searching for novel antimalarial
               drugs from Chinese medicines. It was a confidential military program with a
               high priority. As a young scientist in her early career life, I felt overwhelmed by
               the trust and responsibility received for such a challenging and critically impor-
               tant task. I had no choice but to fully devote myself to accomplishing my duties
               (Figure 14).

               Knowledge is prologue in discovery
               Figure 15 shows a photo taken soon after I joined the Institute of Chinese Materia
               Medica. Professor Lou Zhicen (left), a famous pharmacognosist, was mentor-
               ing me on how to differentiate herbs. I graduated from Beijing Medical Col-
               lege in 1955 after four years of training on modern pharmaceutical sciences and
               later attended a training course on theories and practices of traditional Chinese
               medicine designed for professionals with a modern (Western) medicine training
               background between 1959 and 1962. “Fortune favors the prepared mind” and
               “What’s past is prologue.” My prologue of integrated training in both modern
               and Chinese medicine prepared me for the challenges when the opportunities
               to search for antimalarial Chinese medicines became available.

               Information collating and accurate deciphering are the foundation for success
               in research
               After accepting the tasks, I collected over two thousand herbal, animal and
               mineral prescriptions for either internal or external use by reviewing ancient




ook.indb 301                                                                                         5/12/16 1:56 PM


           302                                                                The Nobel Prizes




           Figure 15. Professor Lou Zhicen (left), a famous pharmacognosist, mentoring the author
           on how to differentiate herbs.




           traditional Chinese medical literature and folk recipes, interviewing well-known
           and experienced Chinese medical doctors who provided me prescriptions and
           herbal recipes. I summarized six hundred forty prescriptions in a brochure 抗
           疟单秘验方集 (“Antimalarial Collections of Recipes and Prescriptions”) (Figure
           16). It was this information collection and deciphering that laid a sound founda-
           tion for the discovery of artemisinin. This also differentiates the approaches taken
           by Chinese medicine and general phytochemistry in searching for novel drugs.

           Thorough literature reviewing inspires an idea leading to success
           I reviewed the traditional Chinese literature again when our research stalled, fol-
           lowing numerous failures. In reading 肘后备急方 written by 葛洪 (Ge Hong’s A
           Handbook of Prescriptions for Emergencies, the East Jin Dynasty, around 317–420
           A.D.) (Figure 17), I further pondered the sentence 青蒿一握, 以水二升渍, 绞取
           汁, 尽服之 (A handful of Qinghao immersed in two liters of water, wring out the
           juice and drink it all) which recommended cold Qinghao for alleviating malaria
           symptoms. Most herbs were typically boiled in water and made into decoction
           before taken by the patients.




ook.indb 302                                                                                        5/12/16 1:56 PM


               Artemisinin—A Gift from Traditional Chinese Medicine to the World303




                                                        
               Figure 16. Antimalarial collections of recipes and prescriptions.




                                                            
               Figure 17. Ge Hong’s A Handbook of Prescriptions for Emergencies (East Jin Dynasty,
               around 317–420 A.D.).




ook.indb 303                                                                                         5/12/16 1:56 PM


           304                                                               The Nobel Prizes


               This unique way of using Qinghao suddenly gave me the idea that heat-
           ing might need to be avoided during extraction, in order to preserve the herb’s
           activity. I subsequently redesigned the experiments by extracting the leaves and
           stems of Qinghao separately at a low temperature using water, ethanol and ethyl
           ether [22].
               The earliest mentioning of Qinghao’s application as an herbal medicine was
           found on the silk manuscripts entitled 五十二病方 (Prescriptions for Fifty-two
           Kinds of Disease) unearthed from the third Han Tomb at Mawangdui. Its medical
           application was also recorded in 神农本草经 (Sheng Nong’s Herbal Classic), 补遗
           雷公炮制便览 (Bu Yi Lei Gong Pao Zhi) and 本草纲目 (Compendium of Materia
           Medica) (Figure 18) etc.
               Although the herb Qinghao was widely documented in the traditional Chi-
           nese medical literature, however, few details were given on either the species or
           effective parts of the plant when clinical application was mentioned.
               According to plant taxonomy, there are at least six species in the Artemisia
           family; Artemisia annua L., Artemisia apiacea Hance, Artemisia scoparia Waldst.
           et kit., Artemisia capillaries Thunb., Artemisia japonica Thunb., and Artemisia
           eriopoda Bunge. However, no clear classification was given for the Qinghao (the




           Figure 18. Prescriptions for Fifty-Two Kinds of Disease, unearthed from the Third Han
           Tomb at Mawangdui (left), Bu Yi Lei Gong Pao Zhi (middle), and Compendium of Materia
           Medica (right).




ook.indb 304                                                                                       5/12/16 1:56 PM


               Artemisinin—A Gift from Traditional Chinese Medicine to the World305


               general name of the Artemisia family) regardless of numerous mentions of the
               name Qinghao in the literature, nor did the texts specify the effective parts of the
               plant. All the species in Qinghao (Artemisia) family were used. By the time that
               research on artemisinin was carried out, two Qinghao (Artemisia) species were
               listed in the Chinese Pharmacopoeia and four others were also being prescribed.
                    Our studies confirmed that only Artemisia annua L. (sweet wormwood) con-
               tains meaningful quantity of artemisinin. We subsequently carried out a thor-
               ough study on the herb Qinghao.
                    Figures 19 and 20 show illustrative descriptions of plants and epidermis
               structures of leaves from different species in the Artemisia family [23]. Figure
               21 shows the thin-layer chromatographic spectrums of extracts from Artemisia
               annua L., Artemisia scoparia Waldst. et kit., Artemisia eriopoda Bunge, Artemisia
               capillaris Thunb., Artemisia japonica Thunb., and Artemisia apiacea Hance [23].




               Figure 19. Illustrative description of six species in the artemisia family
               A. Artemisia annua L., B. Artemisia apiacea Hance C. Artemisia capillaris Thunb., D. Arte-
               misia eriopoda Bunge, E. Artemisia japonica Thunb., F. Artemisia scoparia Waldst. et kit.




ook.indb 305                                                                                                5/12/16 1:56 PM


           306                                                                   The Nobel Prizes




           Figure 20. Illustrative epidermis structures of leaves from different species in the Arte-
           misia family (Artemisia capillaries Thunb. has the epidermis structure similar to Artemisia
           scoparia Waldst. et Kit.).



               Samples No 2 (Artemisia annua L. from Hainan province) and No 3 (Arte-
           misia annua L. from Beijing) have peaks eluted at the same retention time as the
           artemisinin reference standard (sample No. 1) while No. 4 (Artemisia scoparia
           Waldst. et kit.), No. 5 (Artemisia eriopoda Bunge), No. 6 (Artemisia capillaris
           Thunb.), No. 7 (Artemisia japonica Thunb.) and No. 8 (Artemisia apiacea Hance)




           Figure 21. Thin-layer chromatographic spectrums of the extracts (Kieselgel 60 F254,
           mobile phase: Petroleum ether/ethyl acetate = 85/15) from 1. Artemisinin reference stan-
           dard 2. Artemisia annua L. from Hainan province, 3. Artemisia annua L. from Beijing,
           4. Artemisia scoparia Waldst. et kit., 5. Artemisia eriopoda Bunge, 6. Artemisia capillaris
           Thunb., 7. Artemisia japonica Thunb., 8. Artemisia apiacea Hance.




ook.indb 306                                                                                             5/12/16 1:56 PM


               Artemisinin—A Gift from Traditional Chinese Medicine to the World307


               do not have any peaks or do not contain artemisinin. The peak from the sample
               No. 2 (Artemisia annua L. from Hainan province) was much higher than that
               from the sample No. 3 (Artemisia annua L. from Beijing) suggesting that Arte-
               misia annua L. growing in Hainan province contained more artemisinin com-
               pared to the Artemisia annua L. collected from Beijing.
                   In addition to the confusion in finding the right plant, variables such as the
               part and origin of the plant, its harvest season, low artemisinin content in the
               plant, extraction and purification process etc. added extra difficulties in the dis-
               covery of artemisinin. Success in identifying effectiveness of neutral Qinghao
               ethyl ether extract was not a simple and easy win.
                   No doubt, traditional Chinese medicine provides a rich resource. Neverthe-
               less, it requires our thoughtful consideration to explore and improve.

               Persistence in the face of challenges
               Research conditions were relatively poor in China in the 1970s. In order to pro-
               duce sufficient quantities of Qinghao extract for clinical trials, our team carried
               out extraction using several household water vats (Figure 22). Some team mem-
               bers’ health deteriorated due to long-term exposure to large quantities of organic




               Figure 22. Under-resourced research conditions in 1970s China.




ook.indb 307                                                                                          5/12/16 1:56 PM


           308                                                                  The Nobel Prizes


           solvents and insufficient ventilation equipment. In order to launch clinical trials
           sooner while not compromising patient safety, based on the limited safety data
           from the animal study, the team members and myself volunteered to take Qin-
           ghao extract ourselves to assure its safety. In 1973, unsatisfactory results were
           observed in the clinical trial using artemisinin tablets, the team carried out a
           thorough investigation and verified poor disintegration of the tablets as the root
           cause, which allowed us to quickly resume the trial using capsules and confirmed
           artemisinin’s clinical efficacy in time.

           Collaborative team efforts expedited translation from scientific discovery to
           effective medicine
           An antimalarial drug research symposium was held by the national project 523
           office in Nanjing on March 8, 1972. At this meeting, on behalf of the Institute
           of Chinese Materia Medica, I reported the positive readouts of Qinghao extract
           No. 191 observed in animal studies performed on rodent malaria and monkeys.
           The presentation evoked significant interest. On November 17, 1972, I reported
           the results of the successful treatment of thirty clinical cases at the national con-
           ference held in Beijing. This triggered nationwide collaboration in research on
           Qinghao for malaria treatment.




           Figure 23. Invention Certificate for Progress in Anti-malarial Research, issued by the
           National Congress of Science and Technology, 1978.




ook.indb 308                                                                                        5/12/16 1:56 PM


               Artemisinin—A Gift from Traditional Chinese Medicine to the World309


                   Today, I would like to express my sincere appreciation again to my fellow
               Project 523 colleagues at the Academy of Traditional Chinese Medicine for their
               devotion and exceptional contributions during the discovery and subsequent
               application of artemisinin. I would like to, once again, thank and congratulate
               our colleagues from the Shandong Provincial Institute of Chinese Medicine, the
               Yunnan Provincial Institute of Materia Medica, the Institute of Biophysics of
               Chinese Academy of Sciences, the Shanghai Institute of Organic Chemistry of
               the Chinese Academy of Sciences, the Guangzhou University of Chinese Medi-
               cine, the Academy of Military Medical Sciences and many other institutes for
               their invaluable contributions in their respective areas of responsibility during
               our collaboration and their help in caring for malaria patients (Figure 23).
                   I would also like to express my sincere respect to the national 523 office
               leadership team for their continuous efforts in organizing and coordinating the
               antimalarial research programs.
                   Without collective efforts, we would not have been able to present artemis-
               inin—our gift to the world—in such a short period of time.



               Malaria Control and Resistance or Tolerance to Artemisinin Drugs

               Malaria remains a severe challenge to global public health
               “The findings in this year’s World Malaria Report demonstrate that the world is
               continuing to make impressive progress in reducing malaria cases and deaths,”
               Dr. Margaret Chan, Director-General of World Health Organization, com-
               mented in the recent World Malaria Report [24].
                   The report indicated positive progress in malaria control as a result of con-
               tinuous intervention: “Since the year 2000, average malaria infection prevalence
               declined 46% in children aged 2–10, from 26% to 14% in 2013. The number of
               malaria infections at any one time dropped 26%, from 173 million to 128 million
               in 2013. Malaria mortality rates have decreased by 47% worldwide and by 54%
               in the WHO Africa Region . . . . By 2015, if the annual rate of decrease over the
               past 13 years is maintained, malaria mortality rates are projected to decrease by
               55% globally and by 62% in the WHO Africa Region. Malaria mortality rates in
               children aged under 5 years are projected to decrease by 61% globally and 67%
               in the WHO Africa Region.”
                   Nevertheless, statistically, approximately 3.3 billion people across 97 coun-
               tries or regions are still at risk of contracting malaria and around 1.2 billion
               people live in high-risk regions where the annual infection rate is at or above
               one per 1000 [24].




ook.indb 309                                                                                       5/12/16 1:56 PM


           310                                                               The Nobel Prizes


               According to the latest statistical estimate, approximately 198 million cases
           of malaria occurred globally in 2013, causing 584,000 deaths, with 90% of these
           in severely affected African countries and 78% being children below age five.
           Only 70% of malaria patients receive artemisinin combination therapies (ACTs)
           in Africa and as high as 56 millions to 69 millions of child malaria patients do
           not have ACTs available for them [24].

           A severe warning about parasites resistant to artemisinin
           Plasmodium falciparum resistance to artemisinin has been detected in five coun-
           tries of the Greater Mekong subregion: Cambodia, the Lao People’s Democratic
           Republic, Myanmar, Thailand and Vietnam. In many areas along the Cambodia–
           Thailand border, Plasmodium falciparum has become resistant to most available
           antimalarial medicines.
                Tolerance of the Plasmodium falciparum to mono artemisinin therapy has
           increased significantly. Although artemisinin-based combination therapies are
           still highly efficacious, increases in the rates of treatment failure with artesunate–
           mefloquine in Thailand and with dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine in Cambodia
           have been reported. There was evidence of genetic changes in the parasites, i.e.
           mutations in the Kelch 13 (K13) propeller domain associated with their reduced
           susceptibility and slow clearance [25].
                It is an even more serious concern—or a severe warning—that resistance to
           artemisnin is not only detected in the Greater Mekong sub-region but has also
           appeared in some African regions [25].

           Global plan for artemisinin-resistant containment
           WHO launched the Global Plan for Artemisinin Resistant Containment
           (GPARC) in January 2011 with a goal to maximize protection to artemisinin
           combination therapies as an effective treatment for Plasmodium falciparum
           malaria. Artemisinin resistance has been confirmed within the Greater Mekong
           sub-region, and potential epidemic risk is undergoing a critical review. Over a
           hundred experts involved in the program reached unanimous agreement that
           the chance of containing and eradicating artemisinin-resistant malaria is very
           limited and there is an urgent need to constrain artemisinin resistance.
               A proactive matrix approach by stopping the spread of resistant parasites,
           increasing monitoring and surveillance to evaluate the artemisinin resistance
           threat; improving access to diagnostics and rational treatment with artemisinin
           combination therapies, investing in artemsinin resistance-related research, and
           motivating action and mobilizing resources is encouraged by WHO to contain or




ook.indb 310                                                                                        5/12/16 1:56 PM


               Artemisinin—A Gift from Traditional Chinese Medicine to the World311


               eliminate artemisinin resistance where it already exists and prevent artemisinin
               resistance where it has not yet appeared [8].
                   To protect the efficacy of artemisinin combination therapies, I strongly urge
               global compliance with WHO’s Global Plan for Artemisinin Resistant Contain-
               ment. This is our responsibility as scientists and medical doctors in the field.


               Chinese Medicine, A Great Treasure

               Before concluding, I would like to briefly discuss Chinese medicine. “Chinese
               medicine and pharmacology are a great treasure-house. We should explore
               them and raise them to a higher level.” (Figure 24). Artemisinin was explored
               using this resource. From our research experience in discovering artemisinin,
               we learned the strengths of both Chinese and Western medicine. There is great
               potential for future advances if these strengths can be fully integrated. We have a
               substantial amount of natural resources from which our fellow medical research-
               ers can develop novel medicines.
                   Since “Tasting a hundred herbs by Sheng Nong,” we have accumulated sub-
               stantial experience in clinical practice, integrated and summarized the medi-
               cal application of most nature resources over the past several thousand years
               through Chinese medicine. Adopting, exploring, developing and advancing
               these practices would allow us to discover more novel medicines beneficial to
               global healthcare.




               Figure 24. Handwriting of Mao Zedong: “Chinese medicine and pharmacology are a
               great treasure-house. We should explore them and raise them to a higher level.”




ook.indb 311                                                                                         5/12/16 1:56 PM


           312                                                                   The Nobel Prizes


               To end my lecture, I would like to share with you a well-known poem, “On the
           stork tower,” written during the Tang Dynasty by Wang Zhihuan (688–742 AD).

                  “The sun along the mountain bows; The Yellow River seawards flows;
                  You will enjoy a grander sight; By climbing to a greater height.”

           Let us reach to a greater height to appreciate Chinese culture and find the beauty
           and treasure in the territory of traditional Chinese medicine!


           Acknowledgements

           I would like to thank all my colleagues in China and overseas for their contribu-
           tions to the discovery, research and clinical applications of artemisinin!
               I am deeply grateful to all my family members for their continuous under-
           standing and support!
               I sincerely appreciate your kind attention!
               Thank you all!


           References
               1. Hippocrates, On Airs, Waters, and Places. 400 B.C. London: Sydenham Society;
                  1849:179–222.
               2. 黄帝内经 疟论篇 第三十五 (Section Thirty Five, Chapter on Malaria of Inner Canon
                  of Yellow Emperor).
               3. Ernst Hempelmann and Kristine Krafts, Bad air, amulets and mosquitoes: 2,000
                  years of changing perspectives on malaria, Malaria Journal 2013, 12:232. (http://
                  www.malariajournal.com/content/12/1/232).
               4. Alphonse Laveran—Nobel Lecture: Protozoa as Causes of Diseases. December
                  11, 1907. “Alphonse Laveran—Nobel Lecture: Protozoa as Causes of Diseases.”
                  Nobelprize.org. Nobel Media AB 2014. Web. Jan 1, 2016. http://www.nobelprize.
                  org/nobel_prizes/medicine/laureates/1907/laveran-lecture.html.
               5. Ronald Ross—Nobel Lecture, Researches on Malaria, December, 12, 1902. “Ronald
                  Ross—Nobel Lecture: Researches on Malaria.” Nobelprize.org. Nobel Media AB
                  2014. Web. Jan 1, 2016. http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/medicine/laure-
                  ates/1902/ross-lecture.html.
               6. William E. Collins and Geoffrey M. Jeffery, Plasmodium malariae: Parasite and
                  Disease, Clin Microbiol Rev. 2007 Oct; 20(4): 579–592.
               7. National Institutes of Health National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases
                  (NIAID) Science Education, Understanding Malaria, Fighting an Ancient Scourge.
               8. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Choosing a Drug to Prevent Malaria
                  (http://www.cdc.gov/malaria/travelers/drugs.html).
               9. WHO, Guidelines for the treatment of malaria, Third edition, April 2015.




ook.indb 312                                                                                            5/12/16 1:56 PM


               Artemisinin—A Gift from Traditional Chinese Medicine to the World313


               10. WHO, Global Plan for Artemisinin Resistance Containment (GPARC).
               11. WHO, Emergency Response to Artemisinin Resistance in the Greater Mekong
                   Subregion.
               12. 神农本草经 卷三 下经 草 下品 草蒿 (Sheng Nong’s Herbal Classic, Volume 3).
               13. 屠呦呦等, 青蒿及青蒿素类药物, 第9页, 化工出版社 (Tu Youyou et al. Artemisia
                   and Artemisinin Drugs, page 9, Chemical Industry Press ISBN 978-7-122-00857-2).
               14. COL Christian F. Ockenhouse, History of U.S. Military Contributions to the Study
                   of Malaria, Military Medicine, 170, 4:12, 2005.
               15. 钱伟长, 刘德培, 20世纪中国知名科学家学术成就概览 ∙ 医学卷 ∙ 药学分册, 333
                   页 (Qian Wei-Chang, Liu De-Pei, Chinese Famous Scientist of the 20th Century
                   Academic Overview, Volume Medicine, Pharmacy, Page 333, Science Press ISBN
                   978-7-03-041517-2)
               16. 疟疾防治研究工作领导小组, 全国疟疾防治研究工作座谈会议的总结, 1971年6月
                   1日 (The National Leading Group Office for Malaria Control, Summary of National
                   Malaria Control Research Meeting, 1st Jun 1971).
               17. 屠呦呦等, 青蒿及青蒿素类药物, 第40页,化工出版社 (Tu Youyou et al. Artemisia
                   and Artemisinin Drugs, page 40, Chemical Industry Press ISBN 978-7-122-00857-2).
               18. 全国疟疾防治研究工作领导小组, 疟疾防治研究工作情况交流 (14), 1972年11月5
                   日 (The National Leading Group Office for Malaria Control, Communication on
                   Malaria Control Research, 5th November 1972).
               19. 屠呦呦等, 青蒿及青蒿素类药物, 第45–56页, 化工出版社 (Tu Youyou et al.
                   Artemisia and Artemisinin Drugs, pages 45–56, Chemical Industry Press ISBN
                   978-7-122-00857-2).
               20. 青蒿素结构研究协作组, 一种新型的倍半萜内酯-青蒿素 科学通报1911, 3: 142
                   (Research Group for Artemisinin: A New Sesquiterpene Lactone—Artemisinin,
                   Chinese Science Bulletin, 1977, 3:142).
               21. C.A. 1977, 87, 98788g.
               22. 葛洪, 肘后备急方, 卷三, 治寒热诸疟方第十六 (Ge Hong, A Handbook of
                   Prescriptions for Emergencies, the 3rd Volume, Recipe No. Sixteen for Treating Cold
                   and Fevers of Malaria, East Jin Dynasty, 300–400 A.D.).
               23. 屠呦呦等, 青蒿及青蒿素类药物, 第13–30页,化工出版社 (Tu Youyou et al.
                   Artemisia and Artemisinin Drugs, pages 13–26, Chemical Industry Press ISBN
                   978-7-122-00857-2).
               24. WHO, World Malaria Report 2014, ISBN 978 92 4 156483 0.
               25. Elizabeth A. Ashley et al, Spread of Artemisinin Resistance in Plasmodium falci-
                   parum Malaria, New England Journal of Medicine, 2014; 371:411–423 July 31, 2014.




ook.indb 313                                                                                             5/12/16 1:56 PM
