PROMOTION AND LIMITATION OF GENETIC
EXCHANGE
Nobel Lecture, 8 December, 1978
by
WERNER ARBER
Department of Microbiology, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Basel, Swit-
zerland


Exchange of genetic material has widely been observed in practically all
living organisms. This suggests that genetic exchange must have been
practised since a long time ago, perhaps ever since life has existed. The rules
followed by nature in the exchange of genetic information are studied by
geneticists. However, as long as the chemical nature of the genetic material
remained unknown, genetics remained a rather abstract branch of the
biological sciences. This gradually began to change after Avery et al. (1944)
had identified DNA as the carrier of genetic information. Their evidence
found an independent support by Hershey and Chase (1952), and it was
accepted by a majority of biologists by 1953 when Watson and Crick (1953)
presented their structural model of DNA. Hence it was clear 25 years ago
that very long, filamentous macromolecules of DNA contained the genes. As
is usual in fundamental research, the knowledge acquired pointed to a
number of new important questions. Among them were those on the
structure and function of genes, but also those on the molecular mecha-
nisms of exchange of genetic material.
    It is at that time, in the fall of 1953, that I joined more or less by chance a
 small group of investigators animated by Jean Weigle and Eduard Kellen-
 berg. One of their main interests concerned the mechanisms of genetic
 recombination. Feeling that the time was not ripe to carry out such studies
 on higher organisms, they had chosen to work with a bacterial virus, the
 nowadays famous bacteriophage lambda (A). It is interesting to see today
 how knowledge acquired in work with phage λ should later strongly
 influence other research in molecular genetics. In this lecture I would like
to trace back to the origin of some discoveries made in the work with A and
point to their importance for subsequent investigations. But let met first
define in more general terms what I mean by genetic exchange.
   Escherichia coli and other bacteria carry all their genes on a single, very
long DNA molecule, except for occasional cases when bacteria have one or
several additional, much shorter DNA molecules, called plasmids, en-
dowed with the ability of autonomous replication. A bacterial strain har-
bouring besides its chromosome a fertility plasmid F can at times donate by
conjugation a copy of its F plasmid to a recipient strain. The F plasmid
then establishes itself in the recipient cell as an autonomous plasmid, and
it will be propagated in its new environment. The donor strain has thus
exchanged genetic information with the recipient strain, and in this case


                                                                                481


482                      Physiology or Medicine 1978


the genetic material transferred had not existed in the recipient strain
before the conjugation. We also note that the exchanged material repli-
cates autonomously, and it does not need to be integrated into the bacterial
chromosome. Therefore, this is an example of reassortment of DNA
molecules.
   This situation contrasts with the one encountered in the so-called gener-
al recombination. Here two individuals exchange homologous genetic
information. An example for this is also seen in bacterial conjugation. With
a low probability, the fertility plasmid F can integrate into the host chromo-
some. In conjugation, the resulting strain (= Hfr strain, for high frequency
of recombination) transfers a relatively long segment of a copy of its own
c h r o m o s o m e t o t h e F - recipient cell. Maintenance of the information
acquired by the recipient depends on its integration into the recipient
chromosome, and this integration usually follows the rules of general
recombination. This means that recombination depends on the finding of
homologous sections on the two interacting genomes; and homology
means identity in the nucleotide sequences, with an allowance made for
rare exceptions to this rule at sites of mutations, which in fact allow the
geneticist to explore these phenomena. Therefore, an exconjugant recom-
binant genome is a hybrid having received part of its information from
one, and part from the other parent. The total information content of the
hybrid is the same as that of each parent. The same rule holds true in
general recombination between two bacteriophages of the same strain, and
it was in work with bacteriophage A that physical exchange between the
two parental genomes was experimentally demonstrated to occur in gener-
al recombination (Kellenberger et al., 196 1; Meselson and Weigle, 196 1).
   We know that the molecular mechanism of general recombination is
quite complex and depends on a number of specific gene products. Some
of these proteins also carry out key functions in DNA replication as well as
in DNA repair.
   The studies of bacteriophage lysogeny in the 1950’s ripened the concept
that other mechanisms of molecular exchange between DNA molecules
must exists. When bacteriophage λ infects a bacterial host cell it can either
reproduce vegetatively to yield a progeny of phage particles or it can
 lysogenize the host cell. In the latter situation the infected most survives,
and it will accept the A genome as a part of its own chromosome. This is
similar to what we have discussed as reassortment of DNA molecules.
However, the A prophage, as is called the λ genome carried in a lysogenic
cell, does not replicate autonomously and its maintenance depends on its
integration into the host chromosome, which usually occurs at a site close
to the genes determining galactose (Gal) fermentation (Wollman, 1953;
Lederberg and Lederberg, 1953; Jacob, 1955). Lysogenic bacteria can be
induced to phage production, and in this process the prophage gets excised
again from the host chromosome. Morse et al. (1956 a,b) observed that
phage lysates obtained by such induction of A-lysogenic Gal+ bacteria were
able to render Gal- bacteria Gal+. This phenomenon is called specialized


                  Promotion and Limitation of Genetic Exchange            483


phage-mediated transduction. The authors mentioned that some of the
Gal+ tranductants obtained did not produce plaque forming phage upon
induction, although these bacteria were immune to superinfection with λ,
a property usually displayed by A-lysogenic bacteria. At that time I studied
A prophage mutants with defects in genes expressed in the cycle of vegeta-
tive phage reproduction. Therefore, Gal+ transductants as just described
were a welcome enrichment of my materials to be studied.
   Let me now show what I still consider a simple, straightforward experi-
ment published in my Ph. D. thesis exactly 20 years ago (Arber, 1958). A
phage λ lysate transducing the Gal+ characters at high frequency (HFT
lysate) was used to infect a Gal- bacterial strain at various multiplicities of
infection of phage particles per cell, and the surviving bacteria were tested
for their Gal and lysogenicity character (Fig. 1).
   As expected, the overall probability of an infected cell to become lyso-
genic remained constant in the range of multiplicities of infection below 1,
i.e. the number of normal-lysogenic bacteria linearly dropped with de-
creasing amounts of phage added (curve 3 of Fig. 1). This curve is exactly
paralleled by the one (curve 1) representing Gal+ transductants found to
be immune to superinfection with λ, but which produced no plaque
forming phage upon induction. In contrast, the number of Gal+ transduc-
tants which both were                 and produced plaque forming phage
upon induction (curve 2) is proportional to the square of the multiplicity of
infection (Arber, 1958; Arber et al., 1957).
   The interpretation given to these observations was that the HFT lysate
used was a mixed population of A phage particles: (a) normal A phages and
         transducing phages which were defective in their capacity to
reproduce serially and thus to form plaques, but which were still able to
lysogenize even after single infection, although they did so with reduced
probability. This interpretation found support in a number of additional
experiments, which I would not like to rediscuss now. In summary, by
 1958 it was shown that in the excision of A prophage from the bacterial
chromosome errors could sometimes produce aberrant phage genomes
having acquired a segment from the host genome and having deleted from
the A genome a segment carrying essential genes for phage reproduction.
A molecular model to explain both precise A excision and the illegitimate
formation of Agal was drawn by Campbell (1962), who had also brought
very important experimental contributions to this field. The analysis of a
large number of independently produced          genomes made it clear that
recombination within DNA molecules, and by extrapolation also between
DNA molecules, occurs sometimes at more or less randomly chosen sites,
and hence not selected on the basis of extended regions of homology.
Obviously, the likelihood for such recombinants to be viable is relatively
small, and nature seems to limit their production to a level several orders
of magnitude below the level of general recombination. In evolution,
however, this kind of illegitimate recombination may be of great impor-
tance.


484                            Physiology or Medicine 1978




Fig. 1: Transduction and lysogenization of the galT galK strain W3350 of E. coli K12 by an
HFT lysate.
  The HFT (high frequency of transduction) lysate used was a phage stock composed of
4.4x10 1 0 plaque forming λ phage particles and an estimated (from electron microscopical
counts and physiological experiments) 2.3 x 10 10  phage particles, which were concluded
from this and additional experiments to be defective in vegetative growth and partially
affected in lysogenization. Aliquots of the host bacteria were infected at various multiplicities
(m.o.i.) with the HFT lysate and then spread on EMB galactose indicator plates containing
anti-h serum. Colonies grown after incubation were tested by replication for A-immunity and
for the ability to produce plaque forming A upon induction.


N o = number of recipient bacteria in infection mixture
N = number of recipient bacteria from the infection mixture found to be (I) Gal+, A-immune,
not producing plaque forming A, hence carrying a              prophage; (2) Gal+, A-immune,
producing plaque forming A and A gal (as verified with selected subclones), hence being
doubly lysogenic for A and          (3) Gal-, A-immune, producing plaque forming A, hence
carrying a A prophage. (4) represents the calculated fraction of bacteria simultaneously
infected with at least one A and one        (From Arber, 1958).



  In the meantime, molecular geneticists have learned to isolate in vivo
derivatives of A able to transduce practically any desired segment of the
host chromosome, and this work has greatly facilitated detailed structural
and functional studies of several selected E. coli genes. In addition, these


                  Promotion and Limitation of Genetic Exchange             485


studies pointed the way to more recently undertaken approaches to pro-
duce in vitro recombinational hybrids between λ (or other vector DNA
molecules) and DNA fragments from any chosen origin.
   The studies of λ lysogeny and of the defective nature of             which
could be complemented by helper phage infection, also influenced work
on animal and plant viruses. The knowledge acquired with λ was taken as a
mode1 and this turned out to be extremely fruitful. We indeed know today
that many situations similar to that of λ exist, where viruses are found
integrated into the host chromosome and where viruses or fragments
thereof can be shown to be defective but activatable by superinfection with
exogenous helper virsus.
   Let me now return to the process of integration and precise excision of
the A prophage. As already stated, this site specific recombination was
explained in a model devised by Campbell (1962). A long and careful
study on this system has culminated a few years ago by its demonstration in
vitro. Some of the few enzymes needed for the process are contributed by
the A phage itself and others by the host bacteria (Nash, 1977). We also
know the nucleotide sequences at which the interaction between the A
genome and the bacterial chromosome occurs (Landy and Ross, 1977).
These show homology over a stretch of 15 nucleotide pairs, but it has been
shown that this length is not sufficient for efficient integration. Rather, the
considerably longer, nonhomologous flanking segments play additional
key roles in the interaction. This is the system of site specific recombina-
tion on which our knowledge is the most advanced.
    The demonstration of recombinational events occurring independently
of extended nucleotide homology, be they site specific or at random,
brought up the question on possible limitations set by nature to such
exchange which might be considered rather undesirable for the life of a
cell.
    Before two DNA molecules of different origin can interact with each
 other directly they must be brought into proximity, into the same com-
 partment. Nature has certainly set up a number of mechanistic barriers
such as membranes to limit free diffusion of genetic materials. On the
other hand, we also know that a number of mechanisms exist with precise-
ly allow the transfer of DNA from one cell to another, and that sometimes
this exchange occurs between cells that are not directly related. May I
 recall that some bacteria1 conjugation plasmids have a relatively wide host
 range, and so do some bacteriophage strains able to transduce segments of
the host chromosome, either by the already described specialized transduc-
tion, or also by the mechanism of general transduction, in which upon
 maturation the phage wrongly packages a segment of the host chromo-
some instead of its own phage genome. However, it is also clear that the
host range is always limited by the need for specific cell surface interac-
tions, and this seems to hold also for the penetration of free DNA into
bacteria1 cells in the process known as transformation. On the other hand,
bypass mechanisms have been demonstrated, e.g. that a phage genome is


486                          Physiology or Medicine 1978


transferable by bacterial conjugation (Jacob and Wollman, 1956) or that a
conjugation plasmid is transduced by bacteriophage (Arber, 1960).
   Sometimes the host range of a bacterial virus can become extended due
to a mutation in one of the phage genes. In contrast to this situation, host-
controlled variation (or modification, as it is now generally called) of
bacteriophage, first described in the early 1950’s (Luria and Human, 1952;
Bertani and Weigle, 1 9 5 3 ; A n d e r s o n a n d F e l i x , 1 9 5 2 ; R a l s t o n a n d
Krueger, 1952) presented the puzzling situation that upon growth on
different host strains, a virus could adapt to propagate on a new host
without this ability being maintained upon backgrowth on the old host.
Hence the adaption could not find its explanation by a mutation in the
phage genome.
   I became interested in these phenomena in 1960 and decided to look at
the mechanisms of host-controlled modification of bacteriophage A. The
two host strains of my choice were a pair of E. coli strains, K12 (shortly
called K), and its PI lysogenic derivative K(P1). A few years before, Leder-
berg (1957) had shown that the Pl prophage determines a system of host-
controlled modification. Restriction of           (phage grown on K) by K(Pl)
bacteria is quite strong:      K forms plaques on K(P1) host bacteria with an
efficiency of 2 x 10 -5 only (Fig. 2). I n contrast, phage adapted to K(Pl)
grows with full efficiency on both K and K(Pl). However, as is characteris-
tic of host-controlled modification, when                   serves as inoculum for
the growth of a multi-cycle stock of A on strain K, the resulting phage
behaves exactly as the original            I wanted to know how fast this re-
adaptation occurs. Therefore, I grew                on strain K for just one lytic
cycle, taking care to inactivate all non-adsorbed A with anti-A serum, which
was then removed by washing. The result was striking. The one cycle
progeny grew on the restrictive host K(Pl) with an efficiency of between
3 x 10-3 and 10 -2 instead of 2 x 10-5. Since the burst size per singly infected


                      Promotion and Limitation of Genetic Exchange                         487




Fig. 3:

  Joint transfer of parental DNA and parental PI-specific modification of heavily 32 P labeled
         into the phage progeny produced after infection at a multiplicity of 0.006 phages per
cell of the non-radioactive host strain K. See text for further explanations (From Arber and
Dussoix, 1962).


host cell ranged between 100 and 200 A particles, this result suggested that
about one progeny phage per cell had “inherited” the parental P1-specific
modification (Arber and Dussoix, 1962; Arber, 1962). We were convinced
that this was transferred from the infecting parental phage particle. But
was it a diffusible internal phage protein or was it perhaps carried on the
parental DNA molecule?
   That the second possibility is the correct explanation became clear in the
following experiment, which I would like to show, also for historical
reasons. It had been demonstrated in the 1950’s that DNA carrying radio-
isotopes loses its viability as a function of the radioactive decay (Hershey et
al., 1951; Stent and Fuerst, 1955). Therefore, phage heavily loaded in its
DNA with 32 P undergoes suicide upon storage. To my knowledge, the
experiment shown in Figure 3 is the only important application of this
rather special technique, which did allow us to trace parental DNA mole-
cules in the course of replication at a time before density labeling methods
had made their proof. A stock of heavily P-labeled          K(Pl) was prepared
                                             32



and carefully purified. One aliquot was immediately used for one cycle of
growth on non-radioactive K bacteria and the phage progeny was stored


488                      Physiology or Medicine 1978


and assayed from day to day. Another aliquot of the parental phage was
directly stored and assayed from day to day. It is seen in Figure 3 that the
viability of this parental phage disappeared exponentially as a function of
the 32 P decay. In contrast, the bulk of the progeny phage grown on non-
radioactive cells for one cycle was perfectly stable as revealed upon assay
on K. However, those phages in the one cycle progeny able to grow on
K(Pl) were inactivated, and their inactivation was about half as rapid as
that of the parental phage (Arber and Dussoix, 1962). These results
indicated that Pl-specific modification carried by the parental
phage is transferred together with a parental DNA strand into the popula-
tion of progeny phage particles. It must be noted that fragmentation of
parental A DNA molecules can occur by recombination with progeny A
DNA molecules in the course of the intracellular phage growth, but it
affects at most half of the parental input. Such recombinants with less than
semiconserved parental DNA would not grow on K(Pl), and their slow
inactivation due to 32 P decay would not be detectable upon assay on K,
since such phage particles represent a small minority of the progeny
population.
    About the same time Grete Kellenberger, who worked in the same
laboratory, and Daisy Dussoix, a Ph. D. student, studied the breakdown of
DNA from irradiated phage λ upon infection of normal host bacteria. We
wondered if the mechanisms of Pl-specific restriction and of inactivation
of phage caused by irradiation had anything in common. For this reason
the fate of A DNA is restrictive host bacteria was investigated, and we could
demonstrate that in the infection of K(Pl) bacteria with             phage an
important fraction of the phage DNA was rapidly degraded (Dussoix and
Arber, 1962). No DNA breakdown was seen in the           K-infected K bacteria.
    The implication of these early findings, that host-controlled modifica-
 tion affected DNA, although the phenomenon could not be explained as a
 mutation, found rapidly additional support. We also realised that the
 phenomenon does not directly depend on phage λ used in the studies and
 that it affects any other DNA in the same way as A DNA, e.g. bacterial
 DNA in conjugation (Arber, 1962). Hence restriction and modification (R-
 M) systems can be looked at as serving as defence mechanisms against the
 uptake of foreign DNA and restriction to be brought by nucleolytic activ-
 ity.
    It took us a while to find out how bacteria can protect their own DNA
 against their restriction nucleases. They do so by postreplicative nucleotide
 methylation at the sites serving the R-M systems for specificity recogni-
 tion (Arber, 1965; Smith et al., 1972; Kühnlein and Arber, 1972).
    Interestingly, the R-M systems                  and        with which the
 fundamental genetic and physiological experiments were carried out do
 not cleave the DNA precisely at the sites used for recognition (Horiuchi
 and Zinder, 1972). This points to rather complex molecular mechanisms
 by which these enzymes act. Careful investigations have already revealed
 important aspects of them (Arber et al., 1975; Yuan et al., 1975; Bickle et


                    Promotion and Limitation of Genetic Exchange                489


al., 1978), so that these systems can serve as models in investigations of
other nucleic acid protein interactions, particularly those showing regional
rather than site specificity. I think in particular at some as yet poorly
understood recombination phenomena pointing to regionally increased
probability of interchange.
    Other restriction enzymes, as is now well known, do cleave unmodified
DNA at the recognition site, which is specific for each particular R-M
system. I think that my colleagues Hamilton Smith and Daniel Nathans will
discuss aspects of the mechanisms of these enzymes and of their applica-
tion to studies of structure and function of DNA. Let me therefore just
mention what is relevant with regard to in vivo genetic exchange. Since
restriction enzymes have been widely used in in vitro recombination of
DNA molecules it is of interest to see that these enzymes can also trigger
r e c o m b i n a t i o n in vivo (Chang and Cohen, 1977). Hence, as in other
biological activities with ability to catalyze antagonistic reactions, the re-
striction enzymes in question can both inhibit genetic exchange as well as
promote it to some degree. This recombination does of course not depend
on major nucleotide homologies on the interacting DNA molecules, but
only on the existence of recognition sites for the enzymes determined by 4
to 6 nucleotide pairs in general.
    The discovery of still another type of genetic exchange not based on
nucleotide homology has also its roots in work with phage λ. Peter Star-
linger was among those fascinated by the explanation of how                    phages
were formed. In the early 1960’s he and his collaborators had fruitfully
extended the knowledge on the randomness of the illegitimate recombina-
tion by genetically determining the endpoints of the bacterial material
picked up by                 This formed a part of their studies on the structure and
function of the galactose operon of E. coli. In the course of their work they
encountered unorthodox mutations with strongly polar effects and several
other unexpected properties. Further investigations of the nature of these
mutations, as well as of similar mutations isolated in other laboratories,
 finally revealed the existence of what is now known as Insertion Sequences
 or IS elements (Starlinger and Saedler, 1976; Bukhari et al., 1977).
    It would be premature to list general properties of IS elements and
related structural entities. It is clear, however, that these elements of the
size of about 600 to 2000, or more, nucleotide pairs can be found in E. coli
and in other bacteria in one or more copies carried at a number of
different chromosomal sites. Spontaneously, such an IS element can show
up at a site not previously occupied by it. This event is called transposition,
 although it remains unclear if the element really jumps from one location
on the chromosome to another, or if a resident IS element prepares a new
copy in view of its integration at a new site. On the other hand, it is clear
that IS elements generally can indeed excise, either precisely or imprecise-
ly, from a given site. Another often encountered property of IS elements is
their ability to form deletions starting at one of the ends of the IS element


490                      Physiology or Medicine 1978


and extending to a perhaps randomly chosen site at a distance of some-
times several genes. All these events are rare indeed, but occur at measur-
able frequencies of perhaps 10 -4 to 10 -8 per cell division, depending on
the system studied. They must be enzymatically determined, and it is likely
that the rate limiting factors are usually repressed. Presumably for this
reason, no enzymological in vitro studies of these mechanisms have yet
been successful. It is still a guess that one or several of the genes determin-
ing the activities of IS elements are located on the IS element itself, which
is also supposed to have specific sites involved in the events of transposi-
tion, excision and deletion formation. Some IS elements have been shown
to contain regulatory signals for gene expression.
    Most of the IS elements described so far in the literature were chance
 isolates, and it remains largely unknown how many different IS elements
are carried e.g. in E. coli K12, nor does one yet have good ideas on the host
 range of particular IS elements. We have started to look for answers to
 these questions by the use of a large plasmid, the bacteriophage Pl pro-
 phage, to trap transposing IS elements inside the E. coli cell. Interestingly,
 an important proportion of spontaneous P 1 prophage mutations affecting
 the functions of vegetative phage growth is explained by the incorporation
 of IS elements, which must originate from the host chromosome. On the
 other hand, several IS elements were also found by chance carried in
 genomes of Pl derivatives not affected in their functions of vegetative
 growth. Preliminary studies indicate that many of the IS elements isolated
 are independent of each other. This should allow us to establish a library
 of transposable IS elements isolated from host strains of bacteriophage PI.
 Hybridisation studies with these IS elements and DNA from various origin
 is then expected to shed light on the question of the host range of particu-
 lar IS elements (Arber et al., 1979).
    IS elements have also been shown to mediate the exchange of more
 extended DNA segments. Transposons are DNA segments flanked by
 identical IS elements or at least repeated sequences. One of the important
 features of a transposon is that it can insert as a unit into another chromo-
 some. For example, an r-determinant element of 23 kb length, carrying the
 genes for resistance to several antibiotics and originally identified as a
 constituant of R plasmids, has been shown to transpose into phage Pl,
 from this into the E. coli chromosome and from the chromosome into
 another bacteriophage genome (Arber et al., 1979). This clearly shows that
 under natural conditions relatively long DNA segments can translocate
 onto a transferable vector DNA molecule, such as a viral genome or a
 conjugative plasmid. And the same element at some later time in another
 host cell can transpose into a cellular chromosome. In principle, there is no
 limit set for genes to be picked up at one time or another on a transposable
 element, since the elements flanking a transposon can also transpose
 independently and thus by chance give rise to the formation of new
 transposons.
    IS elements and related repeated sequences also give rise to cointegra-


                   Promotion and Limitation of Genetic Exchange           491


tion of two DNA molecules, as well as to the dissociation of a single DNA
molecule into two. Chromosomal integration and excision of F and R
plasmids is just one example. Finally a few additional mechanisms contri-
buting to genetic rearrangement and diversity should also be mentioned:
gene inversion, gene amplification and the formation of short partial
duplications. These mechanisms seem also to be driven by IS elements
flanking the genes involved.
   In this lecture I have tried to show that the deeper we penetrate in the
studies of genetic exchange the more we discover a multitude of mecha-
nisms either acting as promotors of exchange or acting to set limits to it,
and some do both. On purpose I discussed only procaryotes and did so
largely by taking examples from E. coli and its phages and plasmids.
   I am aware and puzzled by the roles that site specific exchanges may play
in the ontogeny of higher organisms and at the level of the RNA in gene
expression.
   I gave some thought on the possible reasons why E. coli bacteria might
have set up such a multitude of systems involved in the genetic exchange
which for some reasons must be vital for them. I must confess that I did
not find out why, besides trivial answers such as “serving in repair pro-
cesses” or “evolutionary driving forces” for the promoting activities, and
“species isolation” or “genetic stability” for the activities keeping genetic
exchange within limits. More intensive research is needed to understand
the apparent complexity of nature. But one important notion already
obtained might be good to keep in mind: in spite of possessing a multitude
of natural mechanisms to promote exchange between genetic materials of
unrelated origin, E. coli and other living organisms have succeeded to
accomplish a relatively high overall stability in their genetic make-up.

Acknowledgements
In the course of   the past 25 years I was very fortunate to benefit from a
large number of     highly qualified collaborators and I received additional
stimulation from   even more colleagues. An important part of my research
found continued    support by the Swiss National Science Foundation.


492                           Physiology or Medicine 1978


REFERENCES


Anderson, E.S. and Felix, A. Nature 170, 492-494 (1952).
Arber, W. Arch. Sci. (Genève) 11, 259-338 (1958).
Arber, W. Virology 11, 273-288 (1960).
Arber, W. Path. Microbiol. 25, 668-681 (1962).
Arber, W. J. Mol. Biol. 1 I, 247-256 (1965).
Arber. W. and Dussoix, D. J. Mol. Biol. 5, 18-36 (1962).
Arber. W., lida, S., Jütte, H., Caspers, P., Meyer, J. and Hänni, Ch. Cold Spring Harbor
   Symp. Quant. Biol. 43, (in press, 1979).
Arber, W., Kellenberger, G. and Weigle, J.J. Schweiz. Z. allg. Pathol. Bakteriol. 20, 659-665
   (1957).
Arber, W., Yuan, R. and Bickle, T.A. Proc. of the 9th FEBS Meeting Budapest 1974. Post-
   Synthetic Modification of Macromolecules Vol. 34, pp. 3-22 (1975). Eds. F. Antoni & A.
   Farago.
Avery, O.T.. MacLeod, C.M. and McCarthy, M. J. Exp. Med. 79, 137-158 (1944).
Bertani. G. and Weigle, J.J. J. of Bact. 65, 113-121 (I 953).
Bickle, T.A., Brack, C. and Yuan, R. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (USA) 75, 3099-3103 (1978).
Bukhari, A.I. and Shapiro, J.A. and Adhya, S.L. DNA Insertion Elements, Plasmids, and
   Episomes. 1977 by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, USA.
Campbell, A.M. Adv. Genet. 11. 101- 145 (1962).
Chang. S. and Cohen, S.N. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (USA) 74, 481 l-4815 (1977).
Dussoix, D. and Arber, W. J. Mol. Biol. 5, 37-49 (1962).
Hershey, A.D. and Chase, M. J. Gen. Physiol. 36, 39-56 (1952).
Hershey, A.D., Kamen, M.D., Kennedy, J.W. and Gest. H. .J. Gen. Physiol. 34, 305-319
   (1951).
Horiuchi, K. and Zinder, N.D. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (USA) 69, 3220-3224 (1972).
Jacob, F. Virology, 1, 207-220 (1955).
Jacob, F. and Wollman, E.L. Ann. Inst. Pasteur 91, 486-510 (1956).
Kellenberger, G., Zichichi. M.L. and Weigle, J.J. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (USA) 47, 869-878
   (1961).
Kühnlein, U. and Arber, W. J. Mol. Biol. 63, 9-19 (1972).
Landy, A. and Ross, W. Science, 197, 1 l47- 1 160 (1977).
Lederherg, S. Virology 3, 496-5 13 (I 957).
Lederberg, E.M. and Lederberg, J. Genetics 38, 51-64 (1953).
Luria. S.E. and Human, M.L. J. of Bact. 64, 557-569 (1952).
Meselson, M. and Weigle. J.J. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (USA) 47, 857-868 (1961).
Morse, M.L., Lederberg, E.M. and Lederberg, J. Genetics 41, 142- 156 (1956a).
Morse, M.L., Lederberg, E.M. and Lederberg, J. Genetics 41, 758-779 (1956b).
Nash, H.A. C.T. Microbiol. lmmunol. 78, 171- 199 (1977).
Ralston, D.J. and Krueger, A.P., Proc. Soc . Exptl. Biol. Med. 80, 217-220 (1952).
Smith, J.D., Arber, W. and Kühnlein, U. J. Mol. Biol. 63, l-8 (1972).
Starlinger, P. and Saedler, H. Current Topics in Microbiology and Immunology, 75, 111-
   152 (1976).
Stent, G.S. and Fuerst, C.R. J. Gen. Physiol. 38, 441-458 (1955).
Watson, J.D. and Crick, F.H.C. Nature 171, 737-738 (1953).
Wollman, E.L.. Ann. Inst. Pasteur 84, 28 I-293 (1953).
Yuan, R., Bickle, T.A., Ebbers. W. and Brack, C. Nature 256, 556-560 (1975).
