                          W   ILLEM   EINTHOVEN


    The string galvanometer and the measurement
           of the action currents of the heart
                      Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1925


May I be permitted to communicate something about the string galvano-
meter, its latest improvements and its use in electrocardiography.
   The string galvanometer consists of a thin thread conducting the electric
current which is stretched as a string in a magnetic field. The thread, as soon
as the current passes through it, is displaced from its position of equilibrium
in a direction at right angles to the direction of the lines of magnetic force.
The amount of displacement is proportional to the strength of the current
passing through the thread, so that this current can be easily and accurately
measured.
   The less the tension in the thread, the weaker are the currents which are
adequate to cause a visible displacement. But, if the current sensitivity is in
this way increased, the string movements are at the same time slowed down,
whilst in most uses of the instrument, one has to deal with rapid variations in
the current. To assess the usefulness of the instrument, we therefore introduce
instead of current sensitivity the concept of normal sensitivity and define this
as the sensitivity at a certain arbitrarily established, constant duration of the
deviation of the string. In more precise form we write




in which G is the normal sensitivity and A that strength of current which
causes the deviation . T is the natural frequency of the freely oscillating
string.
   We assume that the movements of the string are damped down and is
the permanent deviation for a constant current. But T is the frequency which
would be present if the damping down were removed.
   In the string galvanometer the normal sensitivity is conditioned by the
magnification v, the field strength H, the mass M of the string and the char-
acteristics of the material of which the string is made, thus


                         STRING GALVANOMETER                                 95




   The quality of the material is rendered by mw, if m = the mass and w the
resistance of the string per cm of length. If H is expressed in gauss, m and M
in grams, and w in ohms, the constant equals 1/320.
   The normal sensitivity of a string galvanometer can be made 1000 times
greater than that of the most sensitive mirror galvanometer.
   In order to increase the normal sensitivity one must select a favourable
material for the manufacture of the string, use a high magnification and a
strong field, and finally reduce the mass M of the string.
   The possible improvement of the material soon reaches a limit and this
also applies to the increase of the magnification and of the magnetic field
used. A suitable electromagnet with a field of about 20,000 gauss can be
constructed without special difficulty; it will however hardly be deemed pos-
sible to build a galvanometer with a field ten times bigger than this. The cost
would be in any event disproportionately high.
   If we now consider the mass M of the string and restrict ourselves to strings
of a certain constant length, we then see from the formula that the normal
sensitivity is inversely proportional to the diameter of the string. We must
therefore make the string as thin as possible, only reaching the limit when it
is so thin that the observation and reproduction of it are connected with
difficulties.
   While in many of the instruments in use for the most diverse purposes the
string is 2 or 3 thick it is however possible to use strings of 0.1 diameter
and still thinner ones with good results. The figure below (Fig. 1) shows a
thin string which was photographed at a magnification of 1800. Its diameter
could not be accurately measured. But there were good grounds to estimate
this as 0.04 i.e. about 15 times smaller than the wavelength of yellow light
and nevertheless it was possible to obtain a photograph which, although it
was not rich in contrasts, was still reasonably satisfactory.
   A thin string can be induced to move rapidly and under suitable condi-
tions to achieve almost aperiodic displacement, about 0.1 . Under these
conditions the string is strongly stretched and its current sensitivity is only
small. For most purposes a greater current sensitivity is needed, so that it is
necessary to slacken the string. But then one encounters the difficulty of air-
damping which in such a thin string is troublesome and inhibits the move-
ment of the string excessively.


96                           1924 W.EINTHOVEN

Engineer W. F. Einthoven has therefore made a model in which the string
lies in a vacuum and this is specially suitable for the use of very thin strings.
We obtained with this model with a string about 2 cm long and 0.1-0.2
thick and a magnification of the image of the string of 1800 times, a displace-
ment of 1 mm in 0.01 sec for a current of 10 -11 A. This corresponds to an
unparalleled normal sensitivity and one could think that these conditions
would be uncommonly suitable for the study of the small variations of cur-
rent which play so great a role in physiology and medicine.




                Fig. I. A string the diameter of which is estimated
                             to be of the order of


   There is however an insurmountable difficulty. The string does not re-
main still. Molecular movements due to the temperature cause the whole
string to remain in continuous movement. These movements could be
named Brownian string vibrations. If one puts the mean energy of a mole-
cule at a certain temperature at m v 2 ,the string movement which corre-
sponds to one degree of freedom at the same temperature has a mean energy
of m v2. In fact, one obtains about this amount if one calculates the mean
energy from the mass of the string and the movement actually observed.
   In a high vacuum the string oscillates very regularly with its natural fre-
quency; if a little air enters the movements become irregular. It is self-evi-
dent that the air cannot damp down the movements of the string because the
movement of the air molecules is itself the cause of the movements of the
string. If the string is strongly stretched, its natural frequency is high but the
amplitude of the oscillations is small. If one reduces the tension of the string


                            STRING GALVANOMETER                                  97




Fig. 2. Brownian string vibrations magnified about 2,000 times. The string is 18 mm
long and has a diameter of less than   and a resistance of 250,00 ohm. High vacuum.
                 No field-magnet current. The string-circuit is open.


its natural frequency will be lower, but at the same time the amplitude of the
oscillations is greater to such an extent that the mean energy of the string’s
movement remains unchanged.
   If the string is in a strong magnetic field and in a closed electrical circuit the
usual string movements will be electromagnetically damped down. They
induce currents in the circuit outside the galvanometer and must transmit
heat there.
   Since one might at first sight perhaps think that the Brownian string vi-
brations had the same result it will appear that here we have a case of <<perpe-
tuum mobile>> of the second kind. Then, if the circuit is closed by an external
resistance, this would be warmed even if its temperature were warmer than
that of the galvanometer.




               Fig. 3. Air pressure      Hg. Otherwise as in Fig. 2.


98                            1924 W.EINTHOVEN

   The Brownian string vibrations are made irregular by electromagnetic
influences, but in fact they experience no trace of damping. The explanation
of the phenomenon is found if one takes into account the thermal movements
of the electrons in the circuit. These cause Brownian currents which can
neither increase nor reduce the Brownian string vibrations.
   We thus see that measurement of weak currents with thin strings is in
practice limited. But if one has to deal with stronger currents which can
cause a sufficiently large displacement of a strongly stretched string, the
thinnest string is the best because one reaches with it the greatest normal
sensitivity.
   The string galvanometer is within the limits mentioned useful for numer-
ous purposes. For wireless telegraphy a model has been built which has ren-
dered very good service as a receiving apparatus. A short string in vacuo is
tuned to the frequency of the ether oscillations which are sent from some
transmitting station. From the ether oscillations high-frequency alternating
currents are obtained by one of the usual methods which one sends through
the accurately tuned string. As soon as a signal is sent the string is set in mo-
tion and its movements are photographed on a moving strip of paper, so
that the dots and dashes can be recorded. Thus one has a recording apparatus
which is very sensitive, and its decrement can be made precisely controllable
and extraordinarily small.
   A string 1 mm long can be so stretched that its natural frequency is 300000
cycles per second which corresponds to a wavelength of 1 km. It is difficult
to obtain such rapid oscillations of a material in any other way.
   Another technical use of the string galvanometer is the recording of sound




Fig. 4. High vacuum as in Fig. 2. The field-magnet current passes through and the
galvanometer circuit is closed. At A a constant potential difference is applied to the
              galvanometer. Otherwise as in the two preceding figures.


                             STRING GALVANOMETER                                      99




Fig. 5. String-galvanometer recording made in Leiden of wireless signals from Ban-
doeng, Netherlands Indies. Distance 12,000 km. The string is 6 mm long and is tuned
accurately to the incoming waves of = 7.5 km. It thus has a natural frequency of
40,000 whole oscillations per sec. The dots and dashes of the signals are clearly seen in
                                       the figure.

waves which can by means of the telephone or microphone set the string in
oscillations. One has made full use of the instrument in locating the source
of the sound.
   In physiology the string galvanometer has been used with success for re-
cording muscle, nerve and skin currents and also those of sense organs.
   We mention also the psychogalvanic reflex phenomenon, the heart sounds
and the action currents of the heart, and must discuss the latter in further
detail.
  Just as each muscle when it contracts generates an electric current, so the
heart develops electricity at each systole. This was first described by Kölliker
and Müller. The English physiologist Augustus D. Waller then showedthat
the differences in potential which arise in the heart are transmitted to various
parts of the body and that with a sensitive measuring instrument, the capil-
lary electrometer, variations in potential in the human heart can be observed.
One needs only lead the current from the hands and feet to. the measuring
instrument in order to see the variations of the current which show the same
rhythm as that shown by the heart’s action.




 Fig. 6. Reception of wireless signals from an arc transmitter with two galvanometers.
 The string of one is tuned to the working wavelength and that of the other to the wave-
length used when not transmitting signals. Whilst one string oscillates the other remains
                                 quiescent and vice versa.


100                           1924 W.EINTHOVEN




Fig. 7. Vagus currents of the dog. Recording of the currents from the peripheral
stump of the left N. vagus. V, vagus currents; P, pneumogram of the own respiratory
movements of the animal; C, blood-pressure curve; S, signal. Between E and E, the
peripheral stump of the right vagus nerve was stimulatedby induction currents.
The heart became arrested. The heart waves disappear in the left electrovagogram,
                         whilst the respiratory waves persist.

   If one records the displacements in the measuring instrument, one obtains
a curve called the electrocardiogram (ECG). But because of the imperfec-
tions of the capillary electrometer the directly recorded curve does not give
an accurate picture of the actual variations in the potential. In order to ob-
tain a fairly accurate picture one must construct a new curve based upon the
properties of the instrument used and the data of the recorded curve and this
takes much time. This stood in the way of the practical use of electrocardio-
graphy for the investigation of heart diseases, and general interest in the ECG
only developed later, after the string galvanometer had made it possible to
record easily and quickly the required shape with satisfactory accuracy.
   There was a certain satisfaction in learning that the picture constructed by
means of the time-consuming measurements and calculations from the data
of a capillary-electrometer curve corresponded in shape and measurements




Fig. S. Retinal currents. Combined reaction of the three substances A, B, and C. Eyes
       in darkness. At l instantaneous illumination with strong light for 0.01 sec.


                            STRING GALVANOMETER
                                                                                   101




Fig. g. Psychogalvanic reflex phenomenon. Current lead from the thumbs and fingers
of a hand. At P acoustic stimulus is applied. The curve G gives the resultant change in
the resistance of the skin of the person investigated and an upward deflection of one
         scale division corresponds to a reduction in the resistance of 20 ohm.


  with the electrocardiogram directly recorded with the string galvanometer.
  Because this correspondence signified firstly that the earlier calculations were
  correct, and secondly that the new galvanometer fulfilled its purpose.
    An advantage of electrocardiography over other graphic methods for the
 study of the heart and pulse is that the ECG can record in absolute units, and
 the shape of the curve no longer depends on the properties of the instrument
 used. Provided a string galvanometer is correctly built and is suited to its
purpose, i.e. is sensitive and rapid enough, each curve, whenever and where-
ever in the world it may be recorded, is directly comparable to any other
curve.


102                             1924 W.EINTHOVEN

   The investigator cannot be satisfied with the fact that he determines the
shape of the potential variations at the hands and feet. This measurement is
rather the means of bringing to light the functions of the heart. It is therefore
desirable to take the ECG by three leads: I from the right and left hand; II
from the right hand and the left foot; III from the left hand and left foot.
Curves taken by these three leads have a certain relation to each other, i.e. the
degree of potential variation in Lead III is equal to the difference in the po-
tential variations recorded at the same time in Leads I and II.

                             Lead III = Lead II - Lead I

By means of these multiple leads it is possible to measure the direction and
manifest magnitude of the potential variations in the heart itself. The tech-
nique of electrocardiography has developed so far that it is now possible to
record curves with three strings simultaneously. This enables us to control
the quality of the instruments and the accuracy of the methods used. For
when one can confirm the formula practically by means of the curves, one
demonstrates in this way that these curves have been correctly obtained.
   What must we regard as the cause which determines a specific shape of the
ECG or better: What determines the direction and the degree of the potential
difference present in the heart at a given moment?
   The process of contraction of the heart is associated, just as is contraction




Fig. II. Heart sounds and electrocardiogram. The sounds are taken from the apex of
the heart and are indicated by 1, 2, and 3. The third sound is only weak. In the phono-
cardiogram of the first sound, one can differentiate between the initial oscillations a, the
main oscillations b, and the subsequent oscillations c. The arrow indicates both the
beginning of the ventricular complex and that of the systolic heart sound. Both begin
                                     simultaneously.


                                   STRING GALVANOMETER
                                                                                          103




   Fig. 12. Similar to Fig. II. The ventricular complex and the systolic heart sound begin
                                     almost simultaneously.




  Fig. 13. Stokes-Adams disease with hypertrophy of the left ventricle. A positive
                                             wave.




                Fig. 14. Stokes-Adams disease. The               is negative.




Fig. 15. A frog's heart poisoned with veratrin. M, mechanogram; E, electrogram of
the ventricle. The mechanical systole and the electrogram are slowed to the same degree
                            They lasted almost half a minute.


104                             1924 W.EINTHOVEN




Fig. 16. Diphasic action current of a striated muscle. Stimulation at S. After going
through the two phases A and B there is still a late, shallow depression of the curve
         visible. This is comparable to the T-wave of an electrocardiogram.

of a skeletal muscle, with the development of an electrical wave. Still the
heart as a whole may not simply be compared with a skeletal muscle. It has a
different structure. The skeletal muscle consists of fibres which are often of
the same length as the muscle itself. When a contraction wave passes over a
skeletal muscle, the locality at which the summit of the wave is found is elec-
tronegative with regard to the other parts of the muscle.
   The heart muscle, however, consists of microscopically small segments,
which are separated from one another by certain septa. So far as the produc-
tion of electricity is concerned, each segment has to be considered an individ-
uality. When a contraction wave passes over a segment of heart muscle, the
point at which the summit of the wave occurs is electronegative towards all
other points in that same segment. Thus it is for example possible that a con-
traction wave passing over the heart at a given moment may have its summit




Fig. 17. Frog’s heart poisoned with KCl. I, before the use of the KC1 solution. II and
III, during continued poisoning. A, mechanogram of the auricles; V, mechanogram
of the ventricle; E, electrogram of the ventricle;              calibration curves. It is
evident from the curves that the mechanical and electrical phenomena decrease to the
same extent. In III, the summits of the ventricular systole, as well as those of the elec-
                               trogram are just visible.


                            STRING GALVANOMETER
                                                                                  105




 Fig. 18. Similar to Fig. 17, only the poisoning was with chloroform in stead of KCI.


 in the base of the heart whilst nevertheless the direction of potential differ-
 ence measured at the hands and feet indicates a negativity of the apex to the
 base. For, the direction of the created potential difference is determined not
 by the position of the wave in the heart, but by the position of the wave in
 each individual segment.
    One has also to take into account the fact that the potential difference ob-
 served by indirect leads is always the resultant of all the potential differences
present in all the segments of the heart.
   There is strict relationship between the electrical and the mechanical phe-
nomena of the heart systole. The accurate measurement of the moments at
which both begin is beset with difficulties, but in so far as the measurements
are made by a suitable technique and an appropriate method they indicate
that at the moment at which the electrical current begins the first mechanical
results of the contraction are also visible.
   Also the duration of the mechanical contraction corresponds in general to
the duration of the production of electricity.
   And finally there is also a relationship between the force of the contraction
and the magnitude of the potential difference produced.


106                            1924 W.EINTHOVEN




Fig. 19. Preponderance of the right ventricle, negative RI -wave and very high RIII-
                 wave. The three curves were taken successively.




Fig. 20. Preponderance of the left ventricle. Strongly negative RIII -deflection. The
             record was taken simultaneously at the three usual leads.


                              STRING GALVANOMETER
                                                                                      107
   In pathology and clinical work the ECG has attained great significance
because it often facilitates the diagnosis of a disease. This is true for example
in cases of unilateral hypertrophy of the heart.
   In other cases new light has been thrown on known phenomena. As an
example we can mention occasional cases in which a pulse becomes small or
disappears in a series of otherwise regular successive pulses all of the same
magnitude. Formerly one could think that the cause of this intermittence
lies in a heart systole which b ecause it appeared prematurely was so weak that
it could not cause a forceful pulse. Now we know that also the premature
systoles are of full strength and that the weakening or disappearance of the
pulse is due to the fact that in the premature contraction the heart lacks time
to fill its chambers with a sufficient amount of blood. A ventricle empty of
blood cannot, when it contracts, even if its contraction occurs with full force,
send blood into the arteries and thus cannot cause a pulse.
   Fig. 21 shows a strong premature extrasystole with absence of the pulse,
while some seconds later in the same patient and on the same photographic




Fig. 21. Extrasystole which because of its premature occurrence caused no pulse. The
                  heart was empty of blood during the extrasystole.




Fig. 22. An extrasystole similar to the one in the preceding figure. Because of its later
   appearance it caused a strong pulse. The heart had had time to fill with blood.


108                            1924 W.EINTHOVEN

plate a similar but much less premature extrasystole appears (see Fig. 22).
Although in both cases the kind and manner of the heart’s contraction was
the same, in the second case a forceful pulse was caused. This shows that
what was lacking in the first case was not force but blood.
    In Fig. 23 we see in succession an extrasystole with a pulse and one without
it. The latter which is very premature is however very similar to the former.
The atypical electrocardiograms shown in Figs. 21,22, and 23 are all laevo-
grams. In the main they are diphasic and in Lead I the first phase is positive as
in Figs. 21 and 22; in Leads II and III it is negative as in Fig. 23.
    The name laevogram indicates that the curve corresponds to a systole in
which the contraction begins in the left side of the heart and passes from this
to the right heart. A dextrogram gives the reverse picture.
    It has been doubted whether in man a diphasic action current of the heart
with downwardly directed phase I in Leads II and III corresponds to alaevo-
gram and it has been believed on theoretical grounds that the position may
be the reverse. But we have by chance had the opportunity to apply a direct
control in man.
    There was a hitherto quite healthy man whose sternum had been surgi-
cally removed. His heart was covered only by a thin layer of skin. Light
tapping on the area of the heart caused an extrasystole. Because the right
half of the heart lies in man on the anterior side and thus must be stimulated
mechanically by the tapping this must cause a dextrogram. Fig. 24 confirmed
this prediction.
   It may also be stated that this finding is in full agreement with the theory
of the heart muscle segments mentioned above.
   In many cases of disease the diagnosis is possible only by electrocardio-
graphy. This is especially true of certain diseases of the auricles and of anom-




Fig. 23. Two extrasystoles. A1 B1 appeared late and caused a fairly strong pulse. A2 B2
appeared earlier. Instead of the pulse corresponding to them the record shows at n
                                     a depression.


                            STRING GALVANOMETER                                      109




Fig. 24. Man without a sternum. The heart was as good as naked and covered only by
a thin layer of skin. A light tapping on the heart area caused an extrasystole. This is a
pure dextrogram which is in agreement with the theory that the segments of the
         heart muscle are electrically to be regarded as being individual entities.

 alies in various parts of the conduction system which can nowadays be ac-
 curately localized.
    I may be permitted to return in a few words to the capillary electrometer.
    In 1894 we recorded with this instrument an ECG which had a shape
 markedly diverging from curves up till then recorded, which puzzled us.
 The oscillations of the mercury meniscus were so slow that the recorded curve
 must in itself already reproduce approximately the variations in potential ac-
 tually present. Thus a detailed calculation and construction were not carried
 out.
   In the course of 1925 we had the opportunity to investigate the same
person who is now 79 years old with the string galvanometer. In Figs. 25 and
26 one sees how closely the capillary electrometer curve taken with Lead I
 31 years earlier corresponds to the galvanometric curve taken with the same
lead.
   The typical heart anomaly has remained unchanged all this long time but
what was then a puzzle is now explained. The patient had a block in the left
branch of the bundle of His. The ventricles execute abnormal contractions
and produce dextrograms. Clinically it is important that a patient can have
this anomaly for more than 31 years without experiencing excessive discom-
fort and this case is for that reason alone well worth mentioning because un-


110                            1924 W.EINTHOVEN




Fig. 25. Record of an electrocardiogram by means of a capillary electrometer taken on
June 15, 1894, i.e. before the construction of the string galvanometer. Lead I. Blocking
     of conduction in the left branch of the bundle of His. Aberrant dextrogram.

til now clinical work on the whole has had at its disposal only experience in
electrocardiography of limited duration.
    The insight into the true nature of the deficiency has been given to us by
later investigators. Among them the English investigator Thomas Lewis,
who has played a great part in the development of electrocardiography de-
serves special mention. It is my conviction that the general interest in ECG
would certainly not have risen so high, nowadays, if we had had to do with-
out his work, and I doubt whether without his valuable contributions I
should have the privilege of standing before you today.




Fig. 26. The same patient as in Fig. 25 but investigated 31 years later with three leads
simultaneously. The disease has remained unchanged. One notes the similarity of the
  curves taken with the capillary electrometer and the galvanometer with Lead I.


                       STRING GALVANOMETER                              111

   But in addition, innumerable other workers in the field of electrocardio-
graphy have gained great merit. We cannot now name them all but we
conclude with a reference to the happy circumstance that investigators of the
whole world have worked together. A new chapter has been opened in the
study of heart diseases, not by the work of a single investigator, but by that
of many talented men, who have not been influenced in their work by polit-
ical boundaries and, distributed over the whole surface of the earth, have
devoted their powers to an ideal purpose, the advance of knowledge by
which, finally, suffering mankind is helped.
