Albert Fert (French: [albɛʁ fɛʁ]; born 7 March 1938, Carcassonne, France) is a French physicist and one of the discoverers of giant magnetoresistance which brought about a breakthrough in gigabyte hard disks. Currently, he is an emeritus professor at Paris-Saclay University in Orsay, scientific director of a joint laboratory (Unité mixte de recherche) between the Centre national de la recherche scientifique (National Scientific Research Centre) and Thales Group, and adjunct professor at Michigan State University. He was awarded the 2007 Nobel Prize in Physics together with Peter Grünberg.


== Biography ==
Fert graduated in 1962 from the École Normale Supérieure in Paris. There he followed the courses of great physicists like Alfred Kastler or Jacques Friedel, and was passionate about photography and cinema (he was a big admirer of the work of Ingmar Bergman).After graduating from the École Normale Supérieure, he attended the University of Grenoble and in 1963 received his Ph.D. (doctorat de troisième cycle) from the University of Paris with a thesis prepared in the fundamental electronic Orsay Faculty of Sciences and in the physical spectrometry laboratory of the University of Grenoble Faculty of Sciences.
After his return from military service in 1965, he was assistant professor at the Orsay Faculty of Sciences of the University of Paris XI (Université Paris-Sud), and prepared under the direction of Ian Campbell within the Laboratory of Solid Physics of the faculty for a doctorate Sc.D. (doctorat des sciences) in Physical Sciences devoted to the properties of electrical transport in nickel and iron, which he completed in 1970, and was made a professor there in 1976.
He worked as research director for the university's condensed-matter physics laboratory (1970–1995) prior to heading to Unité Mixte de Physique, a laboratory jointly run by the Université Paris-Sud and the technology company Thales.
In 1988, Albert Fert at Orsay in France and Peter Gruenberg in Jülich in Germany, simultaneously and independently, discovered the giant magnetoresistance (GMR) of the magnetic multilayers. This discovery is recognized as the birth of spintronics, a research field which is often described as a new type of electronics exploiting not only the electric charge of the electrons but also their magnetism (their spin). Spintronics has already important applications. One knows that the introduction of GMR read heads in hard disks has led to a considerable increase of their capacity of information storage. Other spintronic properties are exploited in the M-RAM that are expected to impact soon the technology of the computers and phones. In 2007, together with Prof. Grünberg, they received the renowned Japan Award (300.000 Euro) for their discovery of GMR. The same year, they received the Nobel prize in Physics.
In October 2006, Professor Fert received the honorary doctorate from the Department of Physics of the University of Kaiserslautern.Albert Fert had many contributions to the development of spintronics and, after his 2007 Nobel Prize, he is exploring the emerging direction of the exploitation of topological properties in spintronics. His most recent works are on the topologically protected magnetic solitons called skyrmions and on the conversion between charge and spin current by topological insulators.


== Honors and awards ==
American Physical Society's International Prize for New Materials (1994)
Grand prix de physique Jean Ricard of the French Physical Society (1994)
International Union of Pure and Applied Physics (IUPAP) Magnetism Award (1994)
Hewlett-Packard Europhysics Prize (1997)
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique Gold Medal (2003)
Gutenberg Lecture Award (2006)
Wolf Prize in Physics (2006)
Japan Prize (2007)
Elected to the French Academy of Sciences in 2004
Nobel Prize in Physics (2007)
Gay-Lussac Humboldt Award (2014)


== References ==


== External links ==
Unité Mixte de Physique CNRS/Thales official website
Albert Fert on Nobelprize.org