EQUILIBRIUM IN THE LABOUR MARKET WITH
SEARCH FRICTIONS
Prize Lecture, December 8, 2010
by
CHRISTOPHER A. PISSARIDES1
London School of Economics, UK.
Research in the economics of the labour market when there are search
frictions started in the 1960s, with influential contributions from George
Stigler (1962), John McCall (1970) and the papers collected in Edmund
Phelps et al. (1970). Of course, as is common in economics, this was not
the first time that economists took seriously the role of search frictions in
their research. Insightful discussions of the role of frictions in labour market equilibrium can be found much earlier, in books by John Hicks (1932)
and William Hutt (1939). But it was not until the late 1960s that formal
mathematical models of individual behaviour and labour market equilibrium
appeared.
The development of formal mathematical models with search frictions
coincided with the time that I was looking for a topic for my PhD research.
2
Two things about search impressed me most. In the Phelps volume, search
was claimed as a microfoundation for the natural rate of unemployment, introduced just a year or two before by Milton Friedman (1968) and Edmund
Phelps (1967), and for the inflation-unemployment trade-off (the Phillips
curve). It was also claimed, by Axel Leijonhufvud (1968) in particular, that it
could provide a microfoundation for Keynes’s concept of effective demand:
the idea was that the job seeker could make her demand for goods effective
only after she succeeded in locating a mutually acceptable job match.
The articles in the Phelps volume, however, especially those by Phelps
(1970) and Dale Mortensen (1970) which had explicit models of the Phillips
curve, required a wage distribution to obtain the microfoundations of the
Phillips curve. As Peter Diamond (1971) and Michael Rothschild (1973)
pointed out, this was not consistent with the other assumptions of the
models.
3 Leijonhufvud’s claims also required something more than search.
1 I have benefited from discussions with my two co-winners, Peter Diamond and Dale
 Mortensen, and from comments from Gary Fethke, Yannis Ioannides, Rachel Ngai and
 Robert Shimer. 2 This timing coincided with my first meeting with Dale Mortensen, who was a visitor at the
 University of Essex when I was finishing my undergraduate and Master’s studies there, but
 our collaboration had to wait for another twenty years to materialise. 3 Another prominent critic of the papers in the Phelps volume, which influenced the literature
 that followed, was Tobin (1972).
Pissarides_lect.indd 2 2011-08-29 11:07:25
397
They required either wage rigidity or absence of capital markets. Dealing
with these two apparently unconnected issues appeared to be important
items on the research agenda of the macroeconomics of the labour market.
Both the Phillips curve and Keynesian demand management played a key
role in both macroeconomic research and policy, yet they lacked good
theoretical foundations.
4
MATCHING FRICTIONS AND TWO-SIDED SEARCH
One of the appeals of early search theory was that it appeared realistic. The
widely used ILO/OECD definition of unemployment is one of workers
not in a job, looking for one, and available to take one. This was precisely
the definition of unemployment used in search theory. In earlier theory,
both neoclassical and Keynesian, the unemployed are not doing anything
connected with their state. They might be enjoying temporary bouts of
leisure or be idle waiting for a job to open up, but they are not looking for
a job. In the Phelps volume, however, as in the important paper by McCall
(1970), the worker is searching for a wage offer from a fixed distribution of
wages, and if she is unemployed it is because she has failed to locate a high
enough wage offer. This did not seem to be consistent with our intuition of
what makes one unemployed for long periods of time, or with the view of
unemployment taken by applied labour economists and official statistical
agencies. It also appeared inconsistent with equilibrium in markets with
search frictions, at least back then.
Although there were many attempts to derive an equilibrium wage
distribution for markets with search frictions, I took a different approach
to labour market equilibrium that could be better described by the term
“matching”. The idea is that the job search underlying unemployment in the
official definitions is not about looking for a good wage, but about looking
for a good job match. Moreover, it is not only the worker who is concerned
to find a good match, with the firm passively prepared to hire anyone who
accepts its wage offer, but the firm was also equally concerned with locating a
good match before hiring someone.
The foundation for this idea is that each worker has many distinct features,
which make them suitable for different kinds of jobs. Job requirements vary
across firms too, and employers are not indifferent about the type of worker
that they hire, whatever the wage. The process of matching workers to jobs
takes time, irrespective of the wage offered by each job. A process whereby
both workers and firms search for each other and jointly either accept or
reject the match seemed to be closer to reality.
This approach to search has the advantage that it makes unemployment
neither “voluntary” nor “involuntary”, concepts that caused a lot of confusion
and fruitless debate in the literature. Unemployment is instead the outcome
4 The outcome of my early research in these issues was my first book, Pissarides (1976), based
 on my PhD thesis at the London School of Economics.
Pissarides_lect.indd 3 2011-08-29 11:07:25
398
of a decentralised equilibrium, which may or may not be optimal. It seemed
to me that the two-sided matching view had a better chance of success, both
in grounding itself in microeconomic theory and in interpreting the facts
about unemployment. It allowed one to study equilibrium models that could
incorporate real-world features like differences across workers and jobs, and
differences in the institutional structure of labour markets.
The step from a theory of search based on the acceptance of a wage offer,
and one based on a good match, is small, but has far-reaching implications
for the modelling of the labour market. The reason is that in the case of
searching for a good match we can bring in the matching function as a
description of the choices available to the worker. The matching function
captures many features of frictions in labour markets that are not made
explicit. It is a black box, as Barbara Petrongolo and I called it in our 2001
survey, in the same sense that the production function is a black box of
technology. But it captures the key idea of a good match: it takes time to find
a good match, the length of time it takes varies across workers in unpredictable ways, and if there were more job vacancies available, on average workers
would find a good job match faster. The same applies to firms looking for
workers; the matching function treats workers and firms symmetrically.
Importantly, because the matching function was similar to other aggregate
functions used in economic models, it became possible to write small
equilibrium models of the labour market, with frictions captured by the
matching function. It also became possible to estimate these models with real
world data. I estimated the matching function with British data, and Olivier
Blanchard and Peter Diamond estimated it with US data, with encouraging
results (see Pissarides, 1986, and Blanchard and Diamond, 1989).
TOWARDS AN EQUILIBRIUM MODEL
I first used the matching function explicitly in 1979 (Pissarides, 1979),
making it the main building block of an economy-wide model, at about the
same time that Peter Diamond and Eric Maskin (1979) used the similar idea
of the “search technology”. The model of my paper had no wage differentials but it had different methods of search. My main interest was to show
that with a matching function one could get an interesting, simple model of
equilibrium vacancies and unemployment without a wage distribution.
But my 1979 paper still had no theory of wages. Soon after, however, it
seems that all three of us independently realised that since frictions imply
that the firm and the worker in a good match enjoy some monopoly power;
wages need to share it between them. It helped that in the early 1980s, independent developments in bargaining theory were working out solutions for
the splitting of a “cake”.5 The rewards from a good match in the Diamond5 Most influential among these was Ariel Rubinstein’s (1982) work. A bigger influence on my
 research were informal discussions with my colleagues at LSE, who also pioneered work
in this area, in particular Kenneth Binmore, Avner Shaked and John Sutton. See Binmore,
 Rubinstein and Asher Wolinski (1986) and Shaked and Sutton (1984).
Pissarides_lect.indd 4 2011-08-29 11:07:25
399
Mortensen-Pissarides (DMP) model was the cake that workers and firms had
to split.
I attempted the derivation of a wage equation in a search model using
ideas in bargaining theory. The outcomes were some working papers that
appeared around 1982, before the electronic era. I was unaware that both
Peter Diamond (1982) and Dale Mortensen (1982) were working on similar
issues and were one or two years ahead of me. The wage equation that I was
deriving from the Nash solution to the wage bargain was virtually identical to
the wage equation in Diamond’s (1982) paper. Seeing their papers on wages
and efficiency made me switch to another issue that needed to be dealt with
in an equilibrium model, that of job creation.
JOB CREATION
In both the Diamond (1982) and Mortensen (1982) papers the problem
investigated was that of a fixed number of workers interacting with a fixed
number of jobs. Yet, when looking at the workings of real labour markets
over time, the most striking feature that one sees is how employment and
job vacancies fluctuate; in other words, how the total number of jobs varies
over time, depending on economic conditions. In order to make the theory
applicable to business cycles there was need for a theory of job creation and
job destruction. In my empirical research with British data (Pissarides, 1986),
I found that the entry into unemployment was a virtually constant fraction of
employment.6 Consequently, I focused on the derivation of a variable entry
into unemployment, through a theory of job creation.
The key feature of the matching model that I made use of was that
employment was derived as the sum of distinct units called jobs, and not as
an aggregate that could be chosen as a single unit. A job is an asset owned
by the firm: if it is vacant it has some value because it can expect to recruit
a worker and yield some profit in the future; if it is filled it is producing for
profit. Vacant jobs are like nascent investment projects that have not started
yielding a return yet. If their net value is positive, the firm can create them
for profit; if it is negative, it is losing money from them, so it makes sense
to close them down. It follows that an equilibrium number of jobs could be
derived from the condition that the value of a new job vacancy must be zero.7
When the zero-profit condition for new vacancies is combined with the
Nash wage equation it gives an equilibrium wage rate and job creation rate
that depend on the frictions as summarised in the matching function, and
on all the other variables that influence labour market outcomes in standard
models, such as productivity and taxes. From this condition I can get the
equilibrium ratio of vacancies to unemployment, called tightness and usually
denoted by the Greek letter T See Figure 1: the zero-profit condition slopes
6 This feature of the data changed dramatically in the years that followed. See Petrongolo and
 Pissarides (2008).
7 See Pissarides (1984, 1985) for the first applications of the “zero-profit condition” to close
 the model.
Pissarides_lect.indd 5 2011-08-31 13:48:12
400
down because at lower wage rates, jobs are more profitable and more vacancies are created; the wage equation slopes up because at higher tightness
workers are more likely to locate an alternative job offer and firms are less
likely to locate an alternative worker if the wage bargain fails, so the worker’s
hand in the wage bargain strengthens.
BEVERIDGE CURVE EQUILIBRIUM
The transition from a model that yields an equilibrium ratio of vacancies to
unemployment to one that yields an equilibrium unemployment, is made
through the Beveridge curve. The Beveridge curve shows combinations of
vacancies and unemployment that are consistent with equality between the
entry into unemployment with the exit from it. This implies that once on
the Beveridge curve, unemployment is not changing, unless one of the flows
(in or out) changes because of an exogenous shock. When the entry into
unemployment is a constant fraction of employment, as we are still assuming,
the shape and properties of the Beveridge curve are essentially given by
the aggregate matching function. At higher vacancy rate there are more
matches between a given number of unemployed workers and job vacancies.
Unemployment falls because of the increased exit from it, and as employment rises, the entry into unemployment also rises. A new point is reached
with a lower unemployment rate, more job matches taking place, and more
workers entering unemployment.
The Beveridge curve is shown in figure 2. The convex shape is due to
the constant returns satisfied by the aggregate matching function. To find
equilibrium unemployment I need to know at what point on the curve the
economy will settle. But since I already have an equilibrium value for the
ratio of vacancies to unemployment from the job creation condition, I can
find that point immediately. I draw a line through the origin with slope the
equilibrium T, and the intersection of the Beveridge curve with this line is
the overall equilibrium of this economy.

wages
Vacancies/unemployment ()
Wage curve
Job creation
Figure 1. Equilibrium wages and market tightness.
Pissarides_lect.indd 6 2011-08-29 11:07:25
401
At the core of this economy are the frictions that characterise the labour
market. These frictions are the forces that keep the Beveridge curve away
from the origin. The frictions could be due to a number of factors, such as
mismatch between the skill requirements of jobs and the skill mix of the
unemployed, differences in location, the institutional structure of an economy
with regard to the transmission of information about jobs, and others. An
economy characterised by more frictions has a Beveridge curve further away
from the origin than an economy with fewer frictions.
Because of frictions, jobs that compete for the same workers could have
different productivities and yet survive in equilibrium. In frictionless markets
only the most productive of these jobs survive, as competition drives the
wages in all jobs to the wage offered by the most productive. Workers
search for the best job that they can find. In models that allow for different
productivities, the position of the Beveridge curve is also affected by the
incentives that workers have to search for and accept jobs. The matching rate
in these models depends on two factors, making contact with a firm looking
for workers and finding the firm’s offer acceptable.
In an economy where workers do not have strong incentives to accept an
offer quickly, for example because they are generously compensated without
preconditions by the unemployment insurance system, the Beveridge curve
lies further away from the origin. An income support policy that does not
impose preconditions is called a passive policy. But policies that support the
unemployed during search, and also provide incentives for more intensive
job search, can shift the Beveridge towards the origin, and improve the
performance of the labour market in matching workers to jobs. In this case
policies are called “active”
A leader in the implementation of active labour market policies is Sweden,
which spends far more than other advanced countries on bringing unemployed
workers to jobs. In contrast, up to the 1980s most countries supported the
unemployed through passive policies, with poor outcomes in the recession of
the 1980s. Most countries have switched from passive to active policies in the
vacancies
unemployment
Job creation
Beveridge
curve

Figure 2. The Beveridge curve and equilibrium vacancies and unemployment.
Pissarides_lect.indd 7 2011-08-29 11:07:25
402
course of the 1990s, following the poor performance of their labour markets
in the 1980s.
COMPARING ECONOMIES OVER SPACE AND TIME
We can use the model to compare two economies, one with more frictions
and passive policies with one with fewer frictions and active policies. The
first economy has a Beveridge curve further away from the origin. It also has
fewer job vacancies for each unemployed worker, because firms expect to
take longer to fill a vacancy. Figure 3 compares these two economies. The
economy with more frictions is shown with the broken lines. An important
conclusion is that the economy with more frictions has more unemployment
than the economy with fewer frictions, but the two economies may have a
similar level of vacancies.
This conclusion can be contrasted with the comparison of two economies at
different levels of aggregate economic activity, demand or supply. A lower
level of aggregate activity implies lower profitability from new jobs. Job creation falls and this rotates the job creation line clockwise, but the Beveridge
curve does not move. Equilibrium unemployment increases and vacancies
fall in response to this shock.
The different response of vacancies to more frictions and lower level of
aggregate activity was used by a number of authors to identify the reasons for
the rise in unemployment in different countries. Richard Jackman, Richard
Layard and Pissarides (1989) first used it to argue that the rise in unemployment in Britain in the 1980s, after the initial big surge associated with Prime
Minister Thatcher’s restrictive monetary and fiscal policies, took place at
more or less constant vacancies. This is shown in Figure 4. The underlying
reasons must have been related to increased frictions in the labour market.
These could be associated with increased mismatch, as the transformation
Figure 3. Comparing economies.
vacancies
unemployment
Job creation lines
Beveridge curves
T
Economy
with more
frictions v
u
Economy
with lower
level of
aggregate
activity
Pissarides_lect.indd 8 2011-08-29 11:07:25
403
of the economy from an industrial to a service one intensified, and to more
generous income support for the unemployed.
It was also very likely due to the build-up of long-term unemployment, which
disillusions the unemployed and damages the incentives they have to look
for work. Long-term unemployment, meaning unemployment that lasts for
a year or more, is a serious consequence of recession that disenfranchises
workers from the labour force and prolongs the impact that recession has on
the quality of the workforce. It can explain why the unemployment rate in
Britain was not falling in the 1980s when the rest of the economy was booming. Governments realised the negative impact of long-term unemployment,
and since then they have tried to contain it with active labour market policies.
8 For this reason, more recent recessions do not exhibit the big shifts in
the Beveridge curve and the long persistence of the negative shocks in the
labour market.
We can see this contrast for Britain when we compare the economy’s
responses to the recession of 2008, in Figure 5. Although other reforms took
place in Britain following the recession of the early 1980s, active policy also
played an important role in containing long-term unemployment. The path
of the economy in the Beveridge diagram in the recent recession is a typical
example of the response of an economy to a negative aggregate shock.
8 Several countries adopted such policies, led by the Nordic countries. See OECD (2007) for
 an update.
Figure 4. The British Beveridge curve, 1975–1984.
Pissarides_lect.indd 9 2011-08-29 11:07:26
404
The British experience contrasts sharply with the experience of the United
States. Katharine Abraham and Lawrence Katz (1986) used unemployment
and vacancy data for the United States9 to argue that the business cycles of
the 1970s and 1980s were due to aggregate shocks and not sectoral shocks,
as argued by David Lillien (1982) and others. Sectoral shocks would have
similar implications to mismatch shocks. But the economy in the late 1970s
and early 1980s was tracing a Beveridge curve in the south-eastern direction,
as implied by an aggregate shock (see Figure 6).
9 The vacancy data were derived from the Conference Board Help-Wanted Index. See their
article for more details.
Figure 5. The British Beveridge curve, 2008–2010.
Figure 6. The US Beveridge Curve, 1975–1984.
Pissarides_lect.indd 10 2011-08-29 11:07:26
405
In the 2008 recession, the US economy started off on a downward southeastern direction, but after the initial shock it traced an increase in unemployment at more or less constant vacancies. It is still too soon to conclude that
this is a shift of the Beveridge curve to the right, but if it was it would be a
feature of intensifying frictions in the United States labour market, which
have not yet been identified (Figure 7). The rise in vacancies and recovery
in output at virtually constant unemployment rate explain why the fragile
recovery has been described as “jobless”.
WAGE STICKINESS
The response of unemployment to shocks is bigger when wages are sticky. Do
markets with frictions have anything new to say about wage stickiness? I am
talking here about real wage stickiness, although similar arguments should
apply to nominal wage stickiness.
In frictionless markets there are no compelling reasons for wage
stickiness. In contrast, in markets with frictions and Nash wage bargains there
is a built-in reason for some wage stickiness. It is that the wage rate depends
on the worker’s non-market returns, which include unemployment insurance
income, the value of home activities like home decoration or childcare, and
the value of extra leisure, like more sleep. The payoffs from these activities
are not cyclical. When the market payoffs go down because of recession, the
home payoffs remain high, and this stops the Nash wage rate short of falling
by as much as the market payoffs.
I explored this wage stickiness in my 1985 paper to derive cyclical fluctuations in unemployment in the model with frictions. But as Robert Shimer
(2005) has shown, it is not enough to explain all the amplification of the
shocks required to match the data. Subsequent work has shown that it can be
enough but only if the firm’s profit share from the match is very small, either
Figure 7. The US Beveridge curve, 2008–2010.
Pissarides_lect.indd 11 2011-08-29 11:07:26
406
because workers take most of the share or because firms have large labour
hiring costs (Marcus Hagedorn and Iourii Manovskii, 2008, Pissarides, 2009).
But markets with frictions can justify another form of wage stickiness,
much more substantial than the one implied by the Nash wage equation.
This was first explored by Robert Hall (2005), who argued that since the
monopoly power implied by frictions implies that there are no conventional
supply and demand functions to tie down the wage rate, the Nash wage is
only one possible outcome consistent with equilibrium. Another is the wage
that depends on the historical median hiring wage, and shocks to demand
do not necessarily change it by much. Hall showed that the wage stickiness
consistent with this argument is enough to give an equilibrium that delivers
all the amplification of shocks on job creation that we see in the data.
This analysis re-opens the issue of wage determination and puts it
into central stage as a topic for future research. Given the many possibilities
allowed by the bilateral monopoly nature of a good match, research needs to
be driven by empirical studies of wage determination for new hires at different
phases of the cycle (see Christian Haefke, Marcus Sonntag and Thijs van
Rens, 2007).
JOB DESTRUCTION
New establishment data by Steven Davis and John Haltiwanger (1990) and
others working in Industrial Organisation, published in the late 1980s and
early 1990s, showed that job destruction rates varied a lot across business
cycles. The main cause of job destruction and the biggest number were
connected with idiosyncratic establishment-specific shocks, but there was
enough variation over the business cycle to render untenable the assumption
that the rate at which workers flow into unemployment is constant. Although
the rate of job destruction determined the job flow, and not the worker flow
into unemployment, the two are closely connected. Anyway, subsequent work
showed that flows into unemployment were cyclical too, although not as
cyclical as the flow out of unemployment (see Shigeru Fujita and Garey
Ramey, 2009).
Following a criticism by Mortensen (1992) of the assumption of a constant
flow rate of workers into unemployment in the first edition of my book
(Pissarides, 1990), we came together to work on extending the model to a
variable job destruction rate. The outcome was our 1994 paper (Mortensen
and Pissarides, 1994) and a series of papers that applied the model to several
issues (Mortensen and Pissarides, 1999).
In our analysis of job destruction we assumed that once jobs are created,
they cannot easily adapt to new technologies. In the simplest version of the
model they do not adapt at all, so the firm keeps the job going for as long
as it is still profitable. When shocks hit that make a job unprofitable, it is
destroyed, the worker is made unemployed, and some new job is established
elsewhere to take its place.
We have shown that like the job acceptance decision in the first generation
Pissarides_lect.indd 12 2011-08-29 11:07:26
407
of search models, the job destruction decision was governed by a reservation
productivity. The firm and the worker agreed which jobs to destroy on the
basis of their joint real return. Under our rules, most job destruction in the
steady state is due to unidentified idiosyncratic shocks, as in the data. But
over the cycle, job destruction goes up in recession, usually with a sudden
upsurge of terminations when the news first breaks out, and goes down in the
recovery phase. This introduces cyclicality in both the job creation and job
destruction rate, predicting well the time series data for the United States.
The variable job destruction rate has implications for the dynamics of
unemployment and the Beveridge curve, but it does not affect the dynamics
of the job creation rate that I discussed earlier in this lecture. It also implies
that there is now an incentive to search on the job and move from one job
to another without experiencing unemployment. The reason is that workers
have an incentive to leave the jobs that are becoming obsolete, or have low
profitability for other reasons. The full model is set out in the second edition
of my book (Pissarides, 2000). Rather than discuss the full model here, I will
discuss the implications of employment protection legislation for unemployment and job flows. This is one policy whose study needs the extended model
with variable job destruction rates, since its objective is to make job destruction more difficult for the firm, with the objective of securing a longer-lasting
employment spell for the worker.
EMPLOYMENT PROTECTION LEGISLATION
Although all advanced countries exercise some kind of employment protection, there are large variations in the type of restrictions implemented
and there are also big differences in their severity across countries (see Per
Skedinger, 2010, for a full analysis). At the risk of oversimplifying, we know
from the OECD that the southern European countries have much stricter
employment protection legislation than the northern countries, and especially than the United States and United Kingdom (OECD, 1999). I will discuss here the restrictions on dismissals that take the form of administrative
procedures that cost the firm time and money. These can be represented in
our models as a pure tax paid by the firm at the time of dismissal.
10
A tax on dismissals reduces job separations. Some low-productivity jobs
that would have been destroyed before the imposition of the tax will now
not be destroyed, as the firm reduces its reservation productivity to reduce
the chances that it might have to pay the tax. So one implication of employment protection legislation is that the size of the flow into unemployment
is lower than otherwise; but average labour productivity is also lower and
10 In the simple model there is no obvious benefit to the worker from these administrative
 restrictions on dismissal, other than saving some jobs from destruction. But in more general
 models with risk aversion these restrictions also can act as insurance against sudden income
 fluctuations, and these can be beneficial to the worker. The welfare implications of
 employment protection legislation would then be different in these models. See Pissarides
 (2010) for one such model.
Pissarides_lect.indd 13 2011-08-29 11:07:26
408
wages should also be lower to compensate the firm for the tax and the lower
productivity.
Another important impact of employment protection legislation is on job
creation. When the firm is creating a job it expects to have to pay the tax in
some future date if it has to dismiss the worker. Job creation falls as a result,
so just like the flow into unemployment, the flow out of unemployment at
given unemployment also falls.
The net impact on unemployment depends on which flow falls more. If
the flow into unemployment falls more than the flow out of unemployment,
unemployment falls to compensate, and vice versa. Empirical work shows
that the impact of employment protection legislation on unemployment is
small and can go either way; but the size of the flows falls, there is less labour
and job turnover, lower average labour productivity and longer durations of
both unemployment and employment (OECD, 1999).
In extended versions of our models, with training, the longer durations
of employment might encourage more training, as workers are more secure
in their jobs and are more willing to undertake training that is specific to
the needs of their firm. And in yet other extended versions with different
kinds of workers, employment protection legislation tends to benefit primary
workers, usually male workers over 25 years old, but hurts other workers, like
women and youths, who go in and out of the labour force at more frequent
intervals than prime-age males.
CONCLUDING REMARKS: WHERE DO WE GO NEXT?
Search and matching theory has come a long way since the early 1980s, when
the first equilibrium matching models appeared in the literature. A recent
book by Brian and John McCall that surveys the economics of search is 550
pages long, and there was a second volume planned for the things left out
(McCall and McCall, 2008).
But there is still a lot to do. We have discovered, just as Sir John Hicks did
in 1932, that the theory of wages is key to understanding the functioning of
labour markets. Sir John described in detail how frictions in labour markets,
mobility costs and trade unions and other institutions influence wages, and
how wages influence employment, very much along the lines that modern
theory describes. But modern theory has still to explore more fully the role
of institutions in its formal models, and this is an area of research that should
attract a lot of attention in the future.
I have also argued that wage stickiness is as important an issue as it has
ever been in macroeconomics. Markets with frictions open up many more
possibilities for wage stickiness and future research needs to explore these.
The financial crisis of 2008 has thrown open the question of the interaction
between capital and labour markets. Equilibrium matching models are
built on the assumption of perfect capital markets. The implied arbitrage
equations under perfect foresight and unlimited borrowing and lending
are used to calculate a value for jobs and workers. These are good starting
Pissarides_lect.indd 14 2011-08-29 11:07:26
409
assumptions, and they have yielded important results. But future work needs to
explore other assumptions about capital markets, and integrate the financial
sector with the labour market. This might suggest another amplification
mechanism for shocks, independently from wage stickiness or fixed costs.
REFERENCES
 1. Abraham, Katharine G. and Lawrence F. Katz (1986). “Cyclical Unemployment:
Sectoral Shifts or Aggregate Disturbances?” Journal of Political Economy 94 (Part I):
507–522.
 2. Binmore, Kenneth G., Ariel Rubinstein and Asher Wolinski (1986). “The Nash
Bargaining Solution in Economic Modelling.” Rand Journal of Economics 17: 176–
188.
 3. Blanchard, Olivier J. and Peter A. Diamond (1989). “The Beveridge Curve.”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1: 1–60.
 4. Davis, Steven J. and John C. Haltiwanger (1990). “Gross Job Creation and
Destruction: Microeconomic evidence and Macroeconomic Implications.” NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 5: 123–168.
 5. Diamond, Peter A. (1971). “A Model of Price Adjustment.” Journal of Economic
Theory 3: 156–168.
 6. Diamond, Peter. A. (1982). “Wage Determination and Efficiency in Search
Equilibrium.” Review of Economic Studies 49: 217–227.
 7. Diamond, Peter A. and Eric Maskin (1979). “An Equilibrium Analysis of Search and
Breach of Contract, I: Steady States.” Bell Journal of Economics 10: 282–316.
 8. Friedman, Milton (1968). “The Role of Monetary Policy.” American Economic
Review 58: 1–17.
 9. Fujita, Shigeru and Garey Ramey (2009). “The Cyclicality of Separation and Job
Finding Rates.” International Economic Review 50: 415–430.
10. Haefke, Christian, Marcus Sonntag and Thijs van Rens (2007). “Wage Rigidity
and Job Creation.” Discussion Paper 3714, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA),
Bonn.
11. Hall, Robert E. (2005). “Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage
Stickiness.” American Economic Review 95: 50–65.
12. Hagedorn, Marcus and Iourii Manovskii (2008). “The Cyclical Behavior of
Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacancies Revisited.” American Economic Review
98: 1692–1706.
13. Hicks, John R. (1932). The Theory of Wages. London, Macmillan.
14. Hutt, William H. (1939). The Theory of Idle Resources. London, Jonathan Cape.
15. Jackman, Richard, Richard Layard and Christopher A. Pissarides (1989). “On
Vacancies.” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 51: 377–394.
16. Leijonhufvud, Axel (1968). On Keynesian Economics and the Economics of Keynes:
A Study in Monetary Theory. New York, Oxford University Press.
17. Lilien, David (1982). “Sectoral Shifts and Sectoral Unemployment.” Journal of
Political Economy 90: 777–793.
18. McCall, John J. (1970). “Economics of Information and Job Search.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 84: 113–126.
19 McCall, Brian P. and John J. McCall (2008). The Economics of Search. Oxford,
Routledge.
20. Mortensen, Dale T. (1970). “A Theory of Wage and Employment Dynamics.” In
Edmund S. Phelps et al. The Microeconomic Foundations of Employment and
Inflation Theory. New York, Norton.
Pissarides_lect.indd 15 2011-08-29 11:07:26
410
21. Mortensen, Dale T. (1982). “The Matching Process as a Non-Cooperative/Bargaining
Game.” In John J. McCall, editor, The Economics of Information and Uncertainty.
Chicago, University of Chicago Press.
22. Mortensen, Dale T. (1992). “Search Theory and Macroeconomics.” Journal of
Monetary Economics 29: 163–167.
23. Mortensen, Dale T. and Christopher A. Pissarides (1994). “Job Creation and Job
Destruction in the Theory of Unemployment.” Review of Economic Studies 61:
397–415.
24. Mortensen, Dale T. and Christopher A. Pissarides (1999). “New Developments in
Models of Search in the Labor Market.” In Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, editors, Handbook of Labor Economics. Amsterdam, North-Holland.
25. OECD (1999). “Employment Protection and Labour Market Performance.”
Employment Outlook, chapter 2. OECD, Paris.
26. OECD (2007). “Activating the Unemployed: What Countries Do.” Employment
Outlook, chapter 5, OECD, Paris.
27. Petrongolo, Barbara and Christopher A. Pissarides (2001). “Looking into the Black
Box: A Survey of the Matching Function.” Journal of Economic Literature 39: 390–
431.
28. Petrongolo, Barbara and Christopher A. Pissarides (2008). “The Ins and Outs of
European Unemployment.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 98:
256–262.
29. Phelps, Edmund S. (1967). “Phillips Curves, Expectations of Inflation and Optimal
Unemployment.” Economica 34: 254–281.
30. Phelps, Edmund S. (1970). “Money Wage Dynamics and Labor Market Equilibrium.”
In Edmund S. Phelps et al. Microeconomic Foundations of Employment and
Inflation Theory. New York, Norton.
31. Phelps, Edmund S. et al. (1970). Microeconomic Foundations of Employment and
Inflation Theory. New York, Norton.
32. Pissarides, Christopher A. (1976). Labour Market Adjustment: Microeconomic
Foundations of Short-Run Neoclassical and Keynesian Dynamics. Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press. Reprinted, 2009.
33. Pissarides, Christopher A. (1979). “Job Matchings with State Employment Agencies
and Random Search.” Economic Journal 89: 818–833.
34. Pissarides, Christopher A. (1984). “Search Intensity, Job Advertising and Efficiency.”
Journal of Labor Economics 2: 128–143.
35. Pissarides, Christopher A. (1985). “Short-Run Equilibrium Dynamics of
Unemployment, Vacancies, and Real Wages.” American Economic Review 75: 676–
690.
36. Pissarides, Christopher A. (1986). “Unemployment and Vacancies in Britain.”
Economic Policy 3: 499–559.
37. Pissarides, Christopher A. (1990). Equilibrium Unemployment Theory. Oxford,
Blackwell.
38. Pissarides, Christopher A. (2000). Equilibrium Unemployment Theory. 2nd ed.,
Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.
39. Pissarides, Christopher A. (2009). “The Unemployment Volatility Puzzle: Is Wage
Stickiness the Answer?” Econometrica 77: 1339–1369.
40. Pissarides, Christopher A. (2010). “Why Do Firms Offer ‘Employment Protection’?”
Economica 77: 613–636.
41. Rothschild, Michael (1973). “Models of Market Organization with Imperfect
Information: A Survey.” Journal of Political Economy 81: 1283–1308.
42. Rubinstein, Ariel (1982). “Perfect Equilibrium in a Bargaining Game.” Econometrica
50: 97–110.
43. Shaked, Avner and John Sutton (1984). “Involuntary Unemployment as a Perfect
Equilibrium in a Bargaining Model.” Econometrica 52: 1351–1364.
Pissarides_lect.indd 16 2011-08-29 11:07:26
411
44. Shimer, Robert (2005). “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and
Vacancies.” American Economic Review 95: 25–49.
45. Skedinger, Per (2010). Employment Protection Legislation. Cheltenham, UK,
Edward Elgar.
46. Stigler, George J. (1962). “Information in the Labor Market.” Journal of Political
Economy 70(Part 2): 94–105.
47. Tobin, James (1972). “Inflation and Unemployment.” American Economic Review
62: 1–18.
Portrait photo of Professor Pissarides by photographer Ulla Montan