STATISTICAL MODELING OF MONETARY POLICY
AND ITS EFFECTS

Prize Lecture, December 8, 2011
by
Christopher A. Sims
Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA.




The science of economics has some constraints and tensions that set it apart
from other sciences. One reﬂection of these constraints and tensions is that,
more than in most other scientific disciplines, it is easy to find economists
of high reputation who disagree strongly with one another on issues of wide
public interest. This may suggest that economics, unlike most other scientific
disciplines, does not really make progress. Its theories and results seem to
come and go, always in hot dispute, rather than improving over time so as
to build an increasing body of knowledge. There is some truth to this view;
there are examples where disputes of earlier decades have been not so much
resolved as replaced by new disputes. But though economics progresses
unevenly, and not even monotonically, there are some examples of real sci-
entific progress in economics. This essay describes one – the evolution since
around 1950 of our understanding of how monetary policy is determined
and what its effects are. The story described here is not a simple success story.
It describes an ascent to higher ground, but the ground is still shaky. Part of
the purpose of the essay is to remind readers of how views strongly held in
earlier decades have since been shown to be mistaken. This should encour-
age continuing skepticism of consensus views and motivate critics to sharpen
their efforts at looking at new data, or at old data in new ways, and generat-
ing improved theories in the light of what they see.
   We will be tracking two interrelated strands of intellectual effort: the
methodology of modeling and inference for economic time series, and the
theory of policy inﬂuences on business cycle ﬂuctuations. The starting point
in the 1950s of the theory of macroeconomic policy was Keynes’s analysis of
the Great Depression of the 1930s, which included an attack on the Quantity
Theory of money. In the 30s, interest rates on safe assets had been at approxi-
mately zero over long spans of time, and Keynes explained why, under these
circumstances, expansion of the money supply was likely to have little effect.
The leading American Keynesian, Alvin Hansen, included in his (1952)
book A Guide to Keynes a chapter on money, in which he explained Keynes’s
argument for the likely ineffectiveness of monetary expansion in a period
of depressed output. Hansen concluded the chapter with, “Thus it is that
modern countries place primary emphasis on fiscal policy, in whose service

                                                                               1


monetary policy is relegated to the subsidiary role of a useful but necessary
handmaiden.”
    The methodology of modeling in the 1950s built on Jan Tinbergen’s
(1939) seminal book, which presented probably the first multiple-equation,
statistically estimated economic time series model. His efforts drew heavy
criticism. Keynes (1939), in a famous review of Tinbergen’s book, dismissed
it. Keynes had many reservations about the model and the methods, but most
centrally he questioned whether a statistical model like this could ever be a
framework for testing a theory. Haavelmo (1943b), though he had important
reservations about Tinbergen’s methods, recognized that Keynes’s position –
doubting the possibility of any confrontation of theory with data via statistical
models – was unsustainable. At about the same time, Haavelmo published his
seminal papers explaining the necessity of a probability approach to specifying
and estimating empirical economic models (1944) and laying out an inter-
nally consistent approach to specifying and estimating macroeconomic time
series models (1943a).
    Keynes’s irritated reaction to the tedium of grappling with the many
numbers and equations in Tinbergen’s book finds counterparts to this day
in the reaction of some economic theorists to careful, large-scale probability
modeling of data. Haavelmo’s ideas constituted a research agenda that to this
day attracts many of the best economists to work on improved successors to
Tinbergen’s initiative.
    Haavelmo’s main point was this: Economic models do not make precise
numerical predictions. Even if they are used to make a forecast that is a
single number, we understand that the forecast will not be exactly correct.
Keynes seemed to be saying that once we accept that models’ predictions will
be incorrect, and thus have “error terms”, we must give up hope of testing
them. Haavelmo argued that we can test and compare models, but that to do
so we must insist that they include a characterization of the nature of their
errors. That is, they must be in the form of probability distributions for the
observed data. Once they are given this form, he pointed out, the machinery
of statistical hypothesis testing can be applied to them.
    In the paper where he initiated simultaneous equations modeling (1943a),
he showed how an hypothesized joint distribution for disturbance terms is
transformed by the model into a distribution for the observed data, and went
on to show how this allowed likelihood-based methods for estimating pa-
rameters. After discussing inference for his model, Haavelmo explained why
the parameters of his equation system were useful: One could contemplate
intervening in the system by replacing one of the equations with something
else, claiming that the remaining equations would continue to hold. This
justification of – indeed definition of – structural modeling was made more
general and explicit later by Hurwicz (1962).
    Haavelmo’s ideas and research program contained two weaknesses that
persisted for decades thereafter and at least for a while partially discredited
the simultaneous equations research program. One was that he adopted
the frequentist hypothesis-testing framework of Neyman and Pearson. This

2


framework, if interpreted rigorously, requires the analyst not to give proba-
bility distributions to parameters. This limits its usefulness in contributing to
analysis of real-time decision-making under uncertainty, where assessing the
likelihood of various parameter values is essential. It also inhibits combina-
tion of information from model likelihood functions with information in the
beliefs of experts and policy-makers themselves. Both these limitations would
have been overcome had the literature recognized the value of a Bayesian
perspective on inference. When Haavelmo’s ideas were scaled up to apply
to models of the size needed for serious macroeconomic policy analysis, the
attempt to scale up the hypothesis-testing theory of inference simply did not
work in practice.
   The other major weakness was the failure to confront the conceptual
difficulties in modeling policy decisions as themselves part of the economic
model, and therefore having a probability distribution, yet at the same time
as something we wish to consider altering, to make projections conditional
on changed policy. In hindsight, we can say this should have been obvious.
Policy behavior equations should be part of the system, and, as Haavelmo
suggested, analysis of the effects of policy should proceed by considering
alterations of the parts of the estimated system corresponding to policy
behavior.
   Haavelmo’s paper showed how to analyze a policy intervention, and did
so by dropping one of his three equations from the system while maintain-
ing the other two. But his model contained no policy behavior equation.
It was a simple Keynesian model, consisting of a consumption behavior
equation, an investment behavior equation, and an accounting identity that
defined output as the sum of consumption and investment. It is unclear
how policy changes could be considered in this framework. There was no
policy behavior equation to be dropped. What Haavelmo did was to drop the
national income accounting identity! He postulated that the government,
by manipulating “G”, or government expenditure (a variable not present
in the original probability model), could set national income to any level it
liked, and that consumption and investment would then behave according to
the two behavioral equations of the system. From the perspective of 1943 a
scenario in which government expenditure had historically been essentially
zero, then became large and positive, may have looked interesting, but by
presenting a policy intervention while evading the need to present a policy
behavior equation, Haavelmo set a bad example with persistent effects.
   The two weak spots in Haavelmo’s program – frequentist inference and
unclear treatment of policy interventions – are related. The frequentist
framework in principle (though not always in practice) makes a sharp
distinction between “random” and “non-random” objects, with the former
thought of as repeatedly varying, with physically verifiable probability dis-
tributions. From the perspective of a policy maker, her own choices are not
“random”, and confronting her with a model in which her past choices are
treated as “random” and her available current choices are treated as draws
from a probability distribution may confuse or annoy her. Indeed economists

                                                                               3


who provide policy advice and view probability from a frequentist perspective
may themselves find this framework puzzling.1 A Bayesian perspective on
inference makes no distinction between random and non-random objects. It
distinguishes known or already observed objects from unknown objects. The
latter have probability distributions, characterizing our uncertainty about
them. There is therefore no paradox in supposing that econometricians and
the public may have probability distributions over policy maker behavior,
while policy makers themselves do not see their choices as random. The
problem of econometric modeling for policy advice is to use the historically
estimated joint distribution of policy behavior and economic outcomes to
construct accurate probability distributions for outcomes conditional on
contemplated policy actions not yet taken. This problem is not easy to solve,
but it has to be properly posed before a solution effort can begin.


I. KEYNESIAN ECONOMETRICS VS. MONETARISM
In the 1950s and 60s economists worked to extend the statistical foundations
of Haavelmo’s approach and to actually estimate Keynesian models. By the
mid-1960s the models were reaching a much bigger scale than Haavelmo’s
two-equation example model. The first stage of this large scale modeling was
reported in a volume with 25 contributors (Duesenberry, Fromm, Klein, and
Kuh, 1965), 776 pages, approximately 150 estimated equations, and a 50 ×
75cm foldout ﬂow chart showing how sectors were linked. The introduction
discusses the need to include a “parameter” for every possible type of policy
intervention. That is, there was no notion that policy itself was part of the
stochastic structure to be estimated. There were about 44 quarters of data
available, so without restrictions on the covariance matrix of residuals, the
likelihood function would have been unbounded. Also, in order to obtain
even well-defined single-equation estimates by standard frequentist methods,
in each equation a large fraction of the variables in the model had to be
assumed not to enter. There was no analysis of the shape of the likelihood
function or of the model’s implications when treated as a joint distribution
for all the observed time series.
   The 1965 volume was just the start of a sustained effort that produced
another volume in 1969, and then evolved into the MIT-Penn-SSRC (or
MPS) model that became the main working model used in the US Federal
Reserve’s policy process. Important other work using similar modeling
approaches and methods has been pursued in continuing research by Ray
Fair described e.g. in his 1984 book, as well as in several central banks.
   While this research on large Keynesian models was proceeding, Milton
Friedman and Anna Schwartz (1963b, 1963a) were launching an alternative
view of the data. They focused on a shorter list of variables, mainly measures
of money stock, high-powered money, broad price indexes, and measures
of real activity like industrial production or GDP, and they examined the
behavior of these variables in detail. They pointed out the high correlation
between money growth and both prices and real activity, evident in the data

4


over long spans of time. They pointed out in the 1963b paper that money
growth tended to lead changes in nominal income. Their book (1963a)
argued that from the detailed historical record one could see that in many
instances money stock had moved first, and income had followed. Friedman
and Meiselman (1963) used single-equation regressions to argue that the
relation between money and income was more stable than that between what
they called “autonomous expenditure” and income. They argued that these
observations supported a simpler view of the economy than that put forward
by the Keynesians: monetary policy had powerful effects on the economic
system, and indeed that it was the main driving force behind business cycles.
If it could be made less erratic, in particular if money supply growth could be
kept stable, cyclical ﬂuctuations would be greatly reduced.
   The confrontation between the monetarists and the Keynesian large scale
modelers made clear that econometric modeling of macroeconomic data
had not delivered on Haavelmo’s research program. He had proposed that
economic theories should be formulated as probability distributions for the
observable data, and that they should be tested against each other on the
basis of formal assessments of their statistical fit. This was not happening.
The Keynesians argued that the economy was complex, requiring hundreds
of equations, large teams of researchers, and years of effort to model it.
The monetarists argued that only a few variables were important and that
a single regression, plus some charts and historical story-telling, made their
point. The Keynesians, pushed by the monetarists to look at how important
monetary policy was in their models, found (Duesenberry, Fromm, Klein,
and Kuh, 1969, Chapter 7, by Fromm, e.g.) that monetary policy did indeed
have strong effects. They argued, though, that it was one among many policy
instruments and sources of ﬂuctuations, and therefore that stabilizing money
growth was not likely to be a uniquely optimal policy.
   Furthermore, neither side in this debate recognized the centrality of
incorporating policy behavior itself into the model of the economy. In the
exchanges between Albert Ando and Franco Modigliani (1965) on the one
hand, and Milton Friedman and David Meiselman on the other, much of
the disagreement was over what should be taken as “autonomous” or “exog-
enous”. Ando and Modigliani did argue that what was “autonomous” ought
to be a question of what was uncorrelated with model error terms, but both
they and their adversaries wrote as if what was controlled by the government
was exogenous.
   Tobin (1970) explained that not only the high correlations, but also the
timing patterns observed by the monetarists could arise in a model where
erratic monetary policy was not a source of ﬂuctuations, but he did so in a
deterministic model, not in a probability model that could be confronted
with data. Part of his story was that what the monetarists took as a policy
instrument, the money stock, could be moved passively by other variables to
create the observed statistical patterns. I contributed to this debate (1972)
by pointing out that the assumption that money stock was exogenous, in the
sense of being uncorrelated with disturbance terms in the monetarist regres-

                                                                             5


sions, was testable. The monetarists regressed income on current and past
money stock, reﬂecting their belief that the regression described a causal
inﬂuence of current and past money stock on current income. If the high
correlations reﬂected feedback from income to money, future money stock
would help explain income as well. It turned out it did not, confirming the
monetarists’ statistical specification.
   The monetarists’ views, that erratic monetary policy was a major source of
ﬂuctuations and that stabilizing money growth would stabilize the economy,
were nonetheless essentially incorrect. With the right statistical tools, the
Keynesians might have been able to display a model in which not only tim-
ing patterns (as in Tobin’s model), but also the statistical exogeneity of the
money stock in a regression, would emerge as predictions despite money
stock not being the main source of ﬂuctuations. But they could not do so.
Their models were full of unbelievable assumptions2 of convenience, making
them weak tools in the debate. And because they did not contain models
of policy behavior, they could not even be used to frame the question of
whether erratic monetary policy behavior accounted for much of observed
business cycle variation.


II. WHAT WAS MISSING
Haavelmo’s idea, that probability models characterize likely and less likely da-
ta outcomes, and that this can be used to distinguish better from worse mod-
els, fits neatly with a Bayesian view of inference, and less comfortably with the
Neyman-Pearson approach that he adopted. Since standard statistics courses
do not usually give a clear explanation of the difference between Bayesian
and frequentist inference, it is worth pausing our story brieﬂy to explain the
difference. Bayesian inference aims at producing a probability distribution
over unknown quantities, like “parameters” or future values of variables. It
does not provide any objective method of doing so. It provides objective
rules for updating probability distributions on the basis of new information.
When the data provide strong information about the unknown quantities, it
may be that the updating leads to nearly the same result over a wide range
of possible initial probability distributions, in which case the results are in a
sense “objective”. But the updating can be done whether or not the results
are sensitive to the initial probability distribution.
   Frequentist inference estimates unknown parameters, but does not pro-
vide probability distributions for them. It provides probability distributions
for the behavior of the estimators. These are “pre-sample” probabilities,
applying to functions of the data before we observe the data.
   We can illustrate the difference by considering the multiplier-accelerator
model that Haavelmo3 used to show that probability-based inference on
these models should be possible. Though it is much smaller than the
Keynesian econometric models that came later, at the time many fewer data
were available, so that even this simple model could not have been sharply
estimated from the short annual time series that were available.

6


The model as Haavelmo laid it out was

                            Ct = b + aYt + et                                 (1)
                            It = q(Ct − Ct−1)+ ht                             (2)
                            Yt = Ct + It.                                     (3)


He assumed                     and                  and that they were inde-
pendent of each other and across time. He suggested estimating the system
by maximum likelihood.
   He intended the model to be useful for predicting the effect of a change
in government spending Gt, though Gt does not appear in the model. This
was confusing, even contradictory. We will expand the model to use data on
Gt in estimating it. He also had no constant term in the investment equation.
We will be using data on gross investment, which must be nonzero even when
there is no growth, so we will add a constant term. Our modified version of
the model, then, is

                            Ct = b + aYt + et                                (1´)
                            It = q0 + q1 (Ct − Ct−1)+ ht                      (2)
                            Yt = Ct + It + Gt                                (3´)
                            Gt = g0 + g1Gt–1 + nt.                            (4)

    We will confront it with data on annual real consumption, gross private
investment, and government purchases from 1929 to 1940.4
    The model does not make sense if it implies a negative multiplier – that is if
it implies that increasing G within the same year decreases Y. It also does not
make sense if γ1, the “accelerator” coefficient, is negative. Finally, it is hard
to interpret if γ1 is much above 1, because that implies explosive growth. We
therefore restrict the parameter space to q1 > 0, g1 < 1.03, 1 − a(1 + q1) > 0.
The last of these restrictions requires a positive multiplier. The likelihood
maximum over this parameter space is then at

          a          b        q0        q1           g0      g1
        0.566       166      63.0     0.000         10.7   0.991

   Note that the maximum likelihood estimator (MLE) for q1 is at the bound-
ary of the parameter space. At this value, the investment equation of the
model makes little sense. Furthermore, the statistical theory that is used in
a frequentist approach to measure reliability of estimators assumes that the
true parameter value is not on the boundary of the parameter space and that
the sample is large enough so that a random sample of the data would make
finding the MLE on the boundary extremely unlikely.




                                                                                7


Figure 1. q1 probability density.


A Bayesian approach to inference provides a natural and reasonable result,
though. The probability density over the parameter space after seeing the
data is proportional to the product of the likelihood function with a prior
density function. If the prior density function is much ﬂatter than the likeli-
hood, as is likely if we began by being very uncertain about the parameter
values, the likelihood function itself, normalized to integrate to one, char-
acterizes our uncertainty about the parameter values. With modern Markov
Chain Monte Carlo methods, it is a straightforward matter to trace out the
likelihood and plot density functions for parameters, functions of param-
eters, or pairs of parameters. Under a ﬂat prior, the density function for γ1
has the shape shown in Figure 1. While the peak is at zero, any value between
0 and 0.25 is quite possible, and the expected value is 0.091. The system’s
dynamics with q1 = 0.2 would be very different from dynamics with q1 close to
zero. So the data leave substantively important uncertainty about the value of
q1 and do not at all rule out economically significant accelerator effects. The
within-year multiplier in this model, that is the effect of a unit change in Gt
on Yt, is 1/(1− a (1 + q1)). Its ﬂat-prior posterior density is shown in Figure
2. Note that the maximum likelihood estimate of the multiplier, shown as a
vertical line in the figure, is 2.30, well to the left of the main mass of the pos-
terior distribution. This occurs because the multiplier increases with q1, and
the MLE at zero is unrepresentative of the likely values of q1.

8


Figure 2. Probability density of multiplier.


In calculating the “multiplier” here, I am looking at the impact of a change
in Gt, in the context of a model in which Gt is part of the data vector for
which the model proposes a probability distribution. There are several ways
of thinking about what is being done in this calculation. One is to say that
we are replacing the “policy behavior equation” (4) by the trivial equation Gt
= G*, holding the other equations fixed, and considering variations in G*.
Another, equivalent, way to think of it is that we are considering choosing val-
ues of nt, the disturbance to the policy equation. The latter approach has the
advantage that, since we have an estimated distribution for nt, we will notice
when we are asking about the effects of changes in nt that the model consid-
ers extremely unlikely.5 While there is nothing logically wrong with asking
the model to predict the effects of unlikely changes, simplifying assumptions
we have made in setting up the model to match data become more and more
questionable as we consider more extreme scenarios.
  Neither of these ways of looking at a multiplier on G is what Haavelmo
did in his hypothetical policy experiment with the model. In fact he did
not calculate a multiplier at all. He instead suggested that a policy-maker
could, by setting G (which, recall, was not in his probability model), achieve
any desired level Y* of total output. He recognized that this implied the
policy-maker could see εt and ηt and choose Gt so as to offset their effects. He
noted that under these assumptions, the effects of changes in Y* on Ct and

                                                                              9


It could be easily calculated from equations (1) and (2). He said that what
he was doing was dropping the accounting identity (3) and replacing it with
Yt = Y*, but one cannot “drop” an accounting identity. What he was actually
doing was replacing an implicit policy equation, Gt ≡ 0, with another, Gt =
Y* − Ct − It, while preserving the identity (3´). Since policy-makers probably
cannot in fact perfectly offset shocks like ht and et, and since they are more
likely to have seen themselves as controlling Gt than as directly controlling Yt,
this policy experiment is rather artificial.
   If Haavelmo had tried to fit his model to data, he would have had to
confront the need to model the determination of his policy variable, Gt.
My extension of Haavelmo’s model in (1´)-(4) specifies that lagged values
of Ct and It do not enter the Gt equation (4) and that the disturbance of
that equation is independent of the other two disturbances. This implies, if
this equation is taken as describing policy behavior, that Gt was determined
entirely by shifts in policy, with no account being taken of other variables in
the economy. This would justify estimating the first two equations in isola-
tion, as Haavelmo suggested. But in fact the data contain strong evidence
that lagged Ct and It do help predict Gt.6 If the model was otherwise correct,
this would have implied (quite plausibly) that Gt was responding to private
sector developments. Even to estimate the model properly would then have
required a more complicated approach.
   This discussion is meant only as an example to illustrate the difference
between frequentist and Bayesian inference and to show the importance
of explicitly modeling policy. It is not meant to suggest that Haavelmo’s
model and analysis could have been much better had he taken a Bayesian
approach to inference. The calculations involved in Bayesian analysis of this
simple model (and described more fully in the appendix) take seconds on a
modern desktop computer, but at the time Haavelmo wrote were completely
infeasible. And the model is not a good model. The estimated residuals from
the MLE estimates show easily visible, strong serial correlation, implying that
the data have richer dynamics than is allowed for in the model.
   In large macroeconomic models it is inevitable that some parameters –
some aspects of our uncertainty about how the economy works – are not
well-determined by the data alone. We may nonetheless have ideas about rea-
sonable ranges of values for these parameters, even though we are uncertain
about them. Bayesian inference deals naturally with this situation, as it did
with the prior knowledge that γ1 should be positive in the example version
of Haavelmo’s model. We can allow the data, via the likelihood function,
to shape the distribution where the data are informative, and use pre-data
beliefs where the data are weak.
   When we are considering several possible models for the same data,
Bayesian inference can treat “model number” as an unknown parameter and
produce post-sample probabilities over the models. When a large model,
with many unknown parameters, competes with a smaller model, these
posterior probabilities automatically favor simpler models if they fit as well as
more complicated ones.

10


   The models the Keynesians of the 1960s were fitting were orders of mag-
nitude larger than Haavelmo’s, with many hundreds, or even thousands, of
free “parameters” to be estimated. Asking the data to give firm answers to
the values of these parameters was demanding a lot, too much, in fact. The
statistical theory that grew out of Haavelmo’s ideas, known as the Cowles
Foundation methodology, provided approximate characterizations of the
randomness in estimators of these parameters, on the assumption that
the number of time series data points was large relative to the number of
parameters being estimated, an assumption that was clearly untrue for these
models. It was frequentist theory, and therefore insisted on treating unknown
quantities as non-random “parameters”. To provide reasonable-looking
estimates, modelers made many conventional, undiscussed assumptions that
simplified the models and made ad hoc adjustments to estimation methods
that had no foundation in the statistical theory that justified the methods.7
   The result was that these models, because they included so many ad hoc
assumptions that were treated as if they were certain a priori knowledge and
because they were estimated by methods that were clearly dubious in this
sort of application, were not taken seriously as probability models of the
data, even by those who built and estimated them. Measures of uncertainty
of forecasts and policy projections made with the models were not reliable.


III. NEW EVIDENCE AND NEW MODELING IDEAS
While the Keynesian modelers were working on their unwieldy large models,
and while Friedman and Meiselman and Anderson and Jordan (1968) were
estimating single-equation models explaining income with money, other
economists were estimating single equations explaining money with income
and interest rates. These latter were labeled “money demand” equations. If,
as my 1972 paper implied, M did in fact behave in the regressions of income
on money like a legitimate explanatory variable, it seemed likely that the
empirical money demand equations were mis-specified. So Mehra (1978) set
out to check whether that was so. He found, surprisingly, that that equation
also passed tests of necessary conditions that income and interest rates were
explaining money causally. The only way to reconcile these results was to put
the variables together in a multiple-equation model to study their dynamics.
   In my 1980a paper I estimated such a model, as a vector autoregression,
or VAR, the type of model I was suggesting in “Macroeconomics and Reality”
(1980b). VAR’s are models of the joint behavior of a set of time series with
restrictions or prior distributions that, at least initially, are symmetric in the
variables. They include, for example, restrictions on lag length – the same
restrictions on all variables in all equations – or prior distributions favor-
ing smooth evolution of the time series in the model. Of course to make
the results interesting, they require some interpretation, which brings in
economic theory at least informally. In the 1980a paper I included data on
interest rates, production, prices, and money. The results showed clearly that
much of the variation in money stock is predictable from past values of the

                                                                               11


interest rate, particularly so after World War II. Furthermore, a considerable
part of the postwar variation in the interest rate was in turn predictable based
on past values of industrial production. Since interest rates were in fact a
concern of monetary policy makers, this made it hard to argue that money
stock itself was an adequate representation of policy or to argue that money
supply variation consisted largely of erratic mistakes. If monetary policy was
in part systematic and predictable historically, it was no longer clear that
shutting down its variation would reduce business cycle ﬂuctuations.
   Of course in the 1970s there was increased attention to modeling
policy behavior from another side. The rational expectations hypothesis was
applied to macroeconomic models. It required that models that included
explicit expectations of the future in behavioral equations should base those
expectations on the full model’s own dynamic structure. A simple version of
a rational expectations model was already common in studies of financial
markets: the “efficient markets” hypothesis stated that excess returns on
assets should be approximately unpredictable, as otherwise there would be
profit opportunities from trading on the predictable returns. This meant that
the kind of test I had applied to the money-income regressions would tend
to imply that any asset price from a smoothly functioning market “causes”
movements in any other publicly observable variable. Some economists
(Fischer Black, in particular, in conversation with me) thought from the start
that money appeared to have a unidirectional causal impact on income in
the monetarist regressions for the same reason that stock prices would, and
that the result was therefore not strong support for the monetarist causal
interpretations of those regressions. But neither the monetarist nor the
Keynesian models at the time implied that quantity of money had the same
kind of properties as an asset price. While my 1980a paper and subsequent
work with VAR models made clear that monetary policy responded to the
state of the economy and that the money stock was predictable in a model
including interest rates, an explicit theoretical model that validated Fischer
Black’s intuition arrived later in my 1989 paper, which showed that a mon-
etary policy of making interest rates respond positively to the growth rate of
the money stock would lead to an apparent causal ordering from money to
income, even in a model with negligible effects of monetary policy on real
variables.
   Another main conclusion from applying the rational expectations hypoth-
esis was that a model of policy behavior was required to accurately model
expectations in the private sector. Since the large Keynesian models had
devoted no attention to careful modeling of policy behavior, they could not
easily take this criticism into account. While the emphasis from this viewpoint
on modeling policy behavior was valuable, the effect on policy modeling of
the rational expectations “critique” of the large Keynesian models was for a
few decades more destructive than constructive.
   Some of the early proponents of rational expectations modeling, such
as Sargent (1973), presented it as implying cross-equation restrictions on
models that were otherwise similar in structure to the then-standard ISLM

12


models. But even in the small model Sargent used in that article, estimating
the complete system as a model of the joint time series behavior was not
feasible at the time – he used the model to derive single equations that he
estimated and used to test implications of rational expectations. Maximum
likelihood estimation of complete systems embodying rational expectations
at the scale needed for policy modeling was not possible.
   Probably even more important to the inhibiting effect on policy-oriented
econometric inference was the emphasis in the rational expectations
literature on evaluating non-stochastic alterations of a policy rule within the
context of a rational expectations model. The intuition of this point could
easily be made clear to graduate students in the context of the Phillips curve.
If one accepted that only surprise changes in the price level had real effects,
then it was easy to show that a negative correlation between unemploy-
ment and inﬂation might emerge when no attempt was made to control
unemployment by manipulating inﬂation (or vice versa), but that there
might nonetheless be no possibility of actually affecting unemployment by
deliberately changing the inﬂation rate, assuming those deliberate changes
were anticipated. If one thought of the Phillips curve in this story as standing
in for a large Keynesian model, the implication was that what policy makers
actually did with econometric models – use them to trace out possible future
paths of the economy conditional on time paths for policy variables – was at
best useless and at worst might have been the source of the US inﬂation of
the 1970s. This story was widely believed, and it supported a nearly complete
shutdown in academic economists’ interest in econometric policy modeling.
   There was in fact no empirical support for this story. The Phillips curve
negative correlation of unemployment with inﬂation did indeed disappear
in the 1970s, but this quickly was reﬂected in Keynesian empirical policy
models, so those models implied little or no ability of policy to reduce unem-
ployment by raising inﬂation. Rising inﬂation was not a deliberate attempt
to climb up a stable Phillips curve. I would support this argument, which is
no doubt still somewhat controversial, in more detail if this essay were about
the evolution of macroeconomics generally, but for current purposes, we
need only note the effect of the story on research agendas: few economists
paid attention to the modeling tasks faced by the staffs of monetary policy
institutions.
   The emphasis on changes in rules as policy experiments was unfortunate in
another respect as well. As we have noted, it was a major defect in Haavelmo’s
framework and in the simultaneous equation modeling that followed his
example that policy changes were always modeled as deterministic, coming
from outside the stochastic structure of the model. Recognition of the im-
portance of modeling policy behavior ought to have led to recognition that
policy changes should be thought of as realizations of random variables, with
those random variables modeled as part of the model’s structure. Instead,
the mainstream of rational expectations modeling expanded on Haavelmo’s
mistake: treating policy changes as realizations of random variables was
regarded as inherently mistaken or contradictory; attention was focused

                                                                             13


entirely on non-stochastic, permanent changes in policy behavior equations,
under the assumption that these equations had not changed before and were
not expected to change again after the intervention.8
   Large econometric models were still in use in central banks. New data
continued to emerge, policy decisions had to be made, and policy makers
wanted to understand the implications of incoming data for the future path
of the economy, conditional on various possible policy choices. Modelers
in central banks realized that the frequentist inference methods provided
by the Cowles Foundation econometric theorists were not adapted to their
problems, and, in the absence of any further input from academic econome-
tricians, reverted to single-equation estimation. No longer was any attempt
made to construct a joint likelihood for all the variables in the model. There
were attempts to introduce rational expectations into the models, but this
was done in ways that would not have been likely to stand up to academic
criticism – if there had been any.9
   Vector autoregressive models were not by themselves competitors with the
large policy models. They are statistical descriptions of time series, with no
accompanying story about how they could be used to trace out conditional
distributions of the economy’s future for given policy choices. In my earliest
work with VAR’s (1980a; 1980b) I interpreted them with informal theory, not
the explicit, quantitative theoretical restrictions that would be needed for
policy analysis. It was possible, however, to introduce theory explicitly, but
with restraint, so that VAR’s became usable for policy analysis. Blanchard and
Watson (1986) and my own paper (1986) showed two different approaches
to doing this. Models that introduced theoretical restrictions into VAR’s
sparingly in order to allow them to predict the effects of policy interventions
came to be known as structural vector autoregressions, or SVAR’s.


IV. CONSENSUS ON THE EFFECTS OF MONETARY POLICY
By 1980 it was clear that money stock itself was not even approximately a
complete one-dimensional measure of the stance of monetary policy. Interest
rates were also part of the picture. Policy makers in the US and most other
countries thought of their decisions as setting interest rates, though perhaps
with a target for a path of money growth in mind. They were also concerned
about the level of output and inﬂation, trying to dampen recessions by
lowering rates and restrain inﬂation by raising rates. But there are many
reasons why interest rates, money, output and prices are related to output
and inﬂation other than the behavior of monetary policy makers. Interest
rates tend to be higher when inﬂation is high, because lenders require to
be compensated for the loss in value of the loan principal through inﬂation.
Interest rates will change when the real rate of return to investment changes,
which can happen for various reasons not related to monetary policy. Private
sector demand for money balances can shift, because of financial innovation
or ﬂuctuating levels of concern about liquidity. Untangling these patterns of


14


mutual inﬂuence to find the effects of monetary policy is inherently difficult
and can at best produce results that leave some uncertainty.
   In my 1986 paper, I attempted this untangling by a combination of
strategies. I postulated that interest rate changes could affect private sector
investment decisions only with a delay, and also that the Federal Reserve
could not, because of delays in data availability, respond within the quarter to
changes in output or the general level of prices. The model also included an
attempt to identify a money demand equation, using two different sets of ad-
ditional restrictions. The effects of monetary policy identified this way were
quite plausible: a monetary contraction raised interest rates, reduced output
and investment, reduced the money stock, and slowly decreased prices. The
effects on output of unpredictable disturbances to monetary policy were
non-trivial, but accounted for only a modest fraction of overall variability in
output. That the responses emerged as “reasonable” was in fact part of the
identification strategy. The precise zero-restrictions on some coefficients
were interacting with qualitative views as to what a response to a monetary
policy contraction should look like.
   This pattern of results turned out to be robust in a great deal of subse-
quent research by others that considered data from other countries and time
periods and used a variety of other approaches to SVAR-style minimalist iden-
tification. A summary of some of this research appeared in Leeper, Sims, and
Zha (1996). It was widely accepted as a reasonable quantitative assessment of
how monetary policy changes affect the economy.
   SVAR’s that isolated an equation for monetary policy behavior could be
used for making conditional policy projections, but they did not become
widely used as the main model in central bank policy discussions. Future
policy is not the only future event that policy makers like to condition on in
making projections. Scenarios involving high or low commodity prices due
to supply disruptions, high or low productivity growth, decline in the value of
the dollar, fiscal policy changes, etc. are often important to policy discussion.
Since SVAR’s were limiting themselves to isolating monetary policy, treating
the rest of the economy as a single “black box” system, they could not easily
provide these types of conditional forecasts. Whether accurate or not, the
existing large scale models could at least provide answers.
   Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005) developed a complete
dynamic, stochastic general equilibrium model (DSGE), in which all
disturbances and equations had economic interpretations and reﬂected
assumed optimizing behavior, yet which also could reproduce the pattern of
responses to a monetary policy shock that had emerged from SVAR models.
Extending their work,10 Frank Smets and Raf Wouters (2007; 2003) showed
that the model could be used to form a likelihood function and that formal
Bayesian inference to estimate the parameters and characterize uncertainty
about them was possible. They could compare their models to VAR’s and
SVAR’s, and they showed that their models were competitive with VAR’s in
terms of fit to the data. They thus finally delivered on Haavelmo’s project: a
macroeconomic model usable for policy analysis that was in the form of an

                                                                              15


asserted probability distribution for the data. It could be compared in fit to
other models, and proposed improvements to it could be evaluated on the
basis of their effects on the full system, not just one equation. Central bank
research staffs around the world recognized the potential value of this type
of model, and many have since developed models of this type. In some cases
this type of model has become the main model used in policy discussions.


V. ARE WE THERE YET?
Haavelmo advocated formulating economic models as probability models
not as an end in itself, but because he saw this as the only way it would be
possible to test models against one another and thereby make progress. We
now have, in Bayesian DSGE models, the first step in Haavelmo’s program.
But these models in their current form are ripe for improvement, in several
directions.
   The recent financial crash and recession was not predicted by the DSGE
models. Predictions from probability models by construction will be subject
to error. It is therefore not the existence of the errors, or even their size,
that is a problem; it is that the errors in the forecasts from the DSGE’s (and
standard SVAR’s, for that matter) were of a size that the models’ probability
structures implied should almost never occur. That too many large errors
occur, compared to the predictions of the models, was verifiable before the
recent crisis, even though the scale of errors in the recent crisis was greater.
Recognizing the true likelihood of large errors in economic models is a
technical challenge, which is one reason they received little attention from
modelers. Perhaps more important was that unusually large errors are by
definition rare events. It is therefore not possible for the historical data by
some mechanical statistical procedure to generate a probability model for
the large errors. That is, the role of prior distributions will be important
in modeling these errors and uncertainty about them will be great. An ap-
proach based on the usual tools of frequentist, large-sample-approximate
econometrics will not suffice.
   A related gap in the current crop of DSGE’s is that they are nearly all based
on linearization around a steady-state growth path. Users of the models are
well aware that the models therefore are likely to become unreliable in the
face of large deviations of the economy from its trend line. Large distur-
bances push us well off the trend line, however, and we need to identify and
model the important nonlinearities that then arise.
   Already many economists are working at integrating more financial data
and more complete models of the financial sector into DSGE models, in
hopes that these improvements will help avoid another crash like that of
2008, or failing that make policy choices in the wake of such a crash more
accurately apparent. Equally important, in fact probably more important
looking ahead, is extending DSGE’s to more accurately model fiscal dynam-
ics. The Bayesian DSGE’s mostly do not model, or do not model accurately,
national debt, the connection of deficits to debt, and the wealth effects on

16


private sector behavior of debt and expected future fiscal policy. These
aspects of the economy are central to current policy discussions.
   The existing DSGE’s are mainly variants on the Christiano, Eichenbaum
and Evans model. This is a “micro-founded” model, in which inertia and
stickiness, instead of being injected into the model in a purely ad hoc way,
are pushed one level down, into the constraints of optimizing representative
agents. But these micro foundations are in many instances clearly at odds
with empirical micro evidence or common sense. Price stickiness, for exam-
ple, is modeled by assuming that there is a constraint or a cost associated with
changing a nominal price, and that firms setting prices are all individually
negligible in size. Everyone understands that actual industries are nearly
always characterized by wide divergences in firm size, with a few large firms
being strategically important. Everyone understands that the “cost” of
changing a nominal price or the constraint that nominal prices can only
be changed at times whose occurrence the firm cannot control are at best
a strained metaphor. If one thinks of DSGE’s as a set of stories that make
economists and policy-makers more comfortable with policy projections that
basically reproduce what would be implied by SVAR’s, the implausibility of
the micro-foundations of the DSGE’s are of secondary importance. But when
the models are used to evaluate welfare effects of alternative policies, these is-
sues become more important. It is unlikely that macroeconomic models that
are explicitly built up from micro data will be feasible in the near future. But
it is feasible to experiment with variations on the inertial mechanisms in the
Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans framework, investigating whether other
specifications can fit as well and might have different policy implications.
   Existing DSGE’s are too tightly parameterized. The Smets and Wouters
US model (2007) for example uses data on seven variables and has 37 free
parameters, about five per “equation”, which is a parameter density that is
probably lower than characterized the large-scale Keynesian models of the
60s and 70s. The result is that Bayesian VAR’s fit better than the DSGE’s, by
a substantial margin.11 The DSGE’s could be made to fit better by adding
parameters allowing more dynamics in the disturbances or more flexible
specifications of various sources of inertia. Since we think of the theory in
these models as at best approximate, though, a more promising approach
may be that of DelNegro and Schorfheide (2004), extended by DelNegro,
Schorfheide, Smets, and Wouters (2007), who use a DSGE as the source for
a prior distribution on the parameters of a SVAR. In their procedure the
result can in principle be nearly identical to the DSGE, if the DSGE fits the
data well. Park (2010) has extended the Del Negro/Schorfheide framework
to make it more realistically reﬂect uncertainties about identification. This
approach to modeling, since it does not treat the DSGE as directly explaining
the data, makes using the model’s microtheory for evaluating welfare effects
of policy impossible. But as I’ve noted above, this may be all to the good. And
use of the model to trace out the distribution of the future of the economy
conditional on various sources of disturbance remains possible, and likely
more accurate than using the DSGE model directly.

                                                                               17


VI. CONCLUSION

Despite some early confusion about how to bring macroeconomic time series
data to bear on the issue, the controversy between Keynesian and Quantity
Theory views of the effects of standard monetary policy is at least for the time
being largely resolved. Interest rate changes engineered by open market
operations do have substantial effects on the economy, both on real output
and inﬂation. Erratic shifts in monetary policy are not the main source of
cyclical variation in the economy. The quantity of money is not a good one-
dimensional index of monetary policy. Effects of monetary policy on output
are fairly quick; effects on inﬂation take longer to play out. The methods of
inference that have been developed in resolving these issues have brought
us close to realizing Haavelmo’s goals for a scientific approach to macroeco-
nomics.
   Nonetheless, there remain uncertainties even about the new consensus
view, and the models now at the frontier still contain major gaps. Much
remains to be done.


APPENDIX: INFERENCE FOR THE HAAVELMO MODEL
The model defined by (1´)–(4) is in the form of a slightly non-standard
simultaneous equations model:


                                                                            (5)

with




   The non-standard aspect of the model is that the covariance matrix of zt
is constrained to be diagonal. The simultaneous equations literature that
emerged from Haavelmo’s insights treated as the standard case a system

18


in which the joint distribution of the disturbances was unrestricted, except
for having finite covariance matrix and zero mean. It is interesting that
Haavelmo’s seminal example instead treated structural disturbances as inde-
pendent, as has been the standard case in the later structural VAR literature.
  Likelihood-based inference is straightforward, if we condition on the
initial (1929) observation. The distribution of zt is Normal, with a diagonal
covariance matrix, i.i.d. across t. So the log pdf of z1930,…, z1940 is




                                                                                (6)


  To arrive at the log likelihood, we first substitute Ct + It + Gt for Yt to reduce
the system to three variables and three equations. Then we write the shocks
as functions of the parameters and the data, using (5) and multiply by the
Jacobian of the transformation from the data vector zt to the shock vector zt,
which is




where       is the contemporaneous coefficient matrix from the 3×3 version
of the system solved to eliminate Yt.

The likelihood can be integrated analytically with respect to the three η
parameters. The integration treated the prior on these parameter as ﬂat in
               and          . With those parameters integrated out, the result-
ing function of the six parameters α, b, q0, q1, g0, and g1 can be treated as a
marginal posterior pdf for those parameters.
   The maximum likelihood estimates displayed in the text are arrived
at by numerical maximization of this marginal posterior. (Thus they are
probably somewhat different from the values of those parameters at the
joint likelihood peak, were maximization over the s parameters and the
other six jointly.) To generate the full posterior distribution, a random walk
Metropolis algorithm was used, with jump distribution N(0, W), where W
was 0.3 times a crude estimate of the second derivative of the log posterior
density near its peak. The crude estimate was just that produced as the ap-
proximate inverse-Hessian during the likelihood maximization computation.
Despite the maximum of the posterior pdf being on the boundary, both
the maximization and the MCMC iterations converged fairly easily. 100,000
draws were used for the MCMC computations. The coefficients a and b in
the consumption function showed effective sample sizes (using the coda
package for R) of 297 and 284, while for the other parameters the effective
size was over one thousand.




                                                                                 19


REFERENCES
Anderson, L. C., and J. L. Jordan (1968), “Monetary and Fiscal Actions: A Test of Their
      Relative Importance in Economic Stabilization,” Federal Reserve Bank of Saint Louis
      Review, pp. 11–24.
Ando, A., and F. Modigliani (1965), “The Relative Stability of Monetary Velocity and the
      Investment Multiplier,” American Economic Review, 55(4), 693–728.
Blanchaed, O.J., and M.W. Watson (1986), “Are Business Cycles All Alike?,” in The American
      Business Cycle: Continuity and Change, ed. by R. Gordon, pp. 123–156, University of
      Chicago Press, Chicago, Illinois.
Christiano, L., M. Eichenbaum, and C. Evans (2005), “Nominal Rigidities and the
      Dynamics Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy, 113(1),
      1–45.
Delnegro, M., and F. Schorfheide (2004), “Priors from General Equilibrium Models for
      VARs,” International Economic Review, 45, 643–673.
Delnegro, M., F. Schorfheide, F. Smets, and R. Wouters (2007): “On the Fit and Forecasting
      Performance of New Keynesian Models,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics,
      25(2), 123–162.
Duesenberry, J. S., G. Fromm, L. R. Klein, and E. Kuh, eds. (1965), The Brookings Quarterly
      Econometric Model of the United States. Rand Mc-Nally.
— eds. (1969), The Brookings Model: Some Further Results. Rand McNally.
Fair, R. C. (1984), Specification, Estimation, and Analysis of Macroeconometric Models, Harvard
      University Press.
Friedman, M., and D. Meiselman (1963), “The Relative Stability of Monetary Velocity and
      the Investment Multiplier in the United States, 1897­–1958,” in Stabilization Policies,
      Commision on Money and Credit.
Friedman, M., and A. J. Schwartz (1963a), A Monetary History of the United States, 1867–1960,
      Princeton University Press.
Friedman, M., and A. J. Schwartz (1963b), “Money and Business Cycles,” The Review of
      Economics and Statistics, 45(1), 32–64.
Haavelmo, T. (1943a), “The statistical implications of a system of simultaneous equations,”
      Econometrica, 11(1), 1–12.
— (1943b), “Statistical Testing of Business-Cycle Theories,” The Review of Economics and
      Statistics, Vol. 25, No.1 (Feb., 1943), pp. 13–18, published by: The MIT Press Stable.
      URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/1924542.
— (1944), “The Probability Approach in Econometrics,” Econometrica, 12 (supplement),
      iii–vi + 1–115. Hansen, A. H. (1952), A Guide to Keynes, McGraw-Hill, New York;
      Toronto; London.
Hurwicz, L. (1962), “On the Structural Form of Interdependent Systems,” in Logic,
      Methodology and Philosophy of Science, pp. 232–239, Stanford University Press, Stanford,
      CA.
Keynes, J. M. (1939), “Professor Tinbergen’s method,” Economic Journal, 49(195), 558–577,
      book review.
Leeper, E. M., C. A. Sims, and T. Zha (1996), “What Does Monetary Policy Do?,” Brookings
      Papers on Economic Activity, (2), 1–78.
Leeper, E. M., and T. Zha (2003), “Modest Policy Interventions,” Journal of Monetary
      Economics, 50(8), 1673–1700.
Liu, T.-C. (1960), “Underidentification, Structural Estimation, and Forecasting,”
      Econometrica, 28(4), pp. 855–865.
Mehra, Y. P. (1978), “Is Money Exogenous in Money-Demand Equations,” The Journal of
      Political Economy, 86(2), 211–228.
Park, W. Y. (2010), “Evaluation of DSGE Models: With an Application to a Two-Country
      DSGE Model,” Discussion paper, Princeton University, http://www.sef.hku.
      hk/~wypark/.



20


Samuelson, P. A. (1939), “Interactions Between the Multiplier Analysis and the Principle of
     Acceleration,” Review of Economics and Statistics.
Sargent, T. J. (1973), “Rational Expectations, the Real Rate of Interest, and the Natural
     Rate of Unemployment,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1973(2), 429–480.
— (1984), “Autoregressions, Expectations, and Advice,” American Economic Review, 74,
     408–15, Papers and Proceedings.
Sims, C. A. (1972), “Money, Income, and Causality,” The American Economic Review,
     62(4), 540–552. — (1980a), “Comparison of Interwar and Postwar Business Cycles:
     Monetarism Reconsidered,”
     American Economic Review, 70, 250–57.
— (1980b), “Macroeconomics and Reality,” Econometrica, 48, 1–48.
— (1986), “Are Forecasting Models Usable for Policy Analysis?,” Quarterly Review of the
     Minneapolis Federal Reserve Bank, 10, 2–16.
— (1987), “A rational expectations framework for short-run policy analysis,” in New ap-
     proaches to monetary economics, ed. by W. A. Barnett, and K. J. Singleton, pp. 293–308,
     Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England.
— (1989), “Models and Their Uses,” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 71, 489–494.
— (2002), “The Role of Models and Probabilities in the Monetary Policy Process,”
     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2002(2), 1–62.
Smets, F., and R. Wouters (2003), “An Estimated Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium
     Model of the Euro Area,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 1, 1123–1175.
— (2007), “Shocks and frictions in US business cycles: a Bayesian DSGE approach,”
     American Economic Review, 97(3), 586–606.
Tinbergen, J. (1939), Statistical testing of business-cycle theories, no. v. 1–2 in Publications:
     Economic and financial, League of Nations, Economic Intelligence Service, http://
     books.google.com/books?id=E8MSAQAAMAAJ.
Tobin, J. (1970), “Money and Income: Post Hoc Ergo Propter Hoc?,” The Quarterly Journal
     of Economics, 84(2), 301–317.


(Endnotes)
1    An example of a sophisticated economist struggling with this issue is Sargent (1984).
     That paper purports to characterize both Sargent’s views and my own. I think it does
     characterize Sargent’s views at the time, but it does not correctly characterize my
     own.
2    This fact, which everyone in some sense knew, was announced forcefully by Liu
     (1960), and much later re-emphasized in my 1980b paper.
3    Haavelmo’s model differs from the classic Samuelson (1939) model only in using cur-
     rent rather than lagged income in the consumption function.
4    We use the chain indexed data, which did not exist when Haavelmo wrote. We con-
     struct Y as C + I + G, since the chain indexed data do not satisfy the accounting iden-
     tity and we are not using data on other GDP components.
5    This is the point made, with more realistic examples, by Leeper and Zha (2003).
6    I checked this by fitting both first and second order VAR’s.
7    For example, two-stage least squares was widely used to estimate equations in these
     models. According to the theory, the more exogenous and predetermined variables
     available, the better the (large-sample) properties of the estimator. But in these
     models there was an embarrassment of riches, so many instruments that two-stage
     least squares using all of them reduced to ordinary least squares – the same method
     Tinbergen used pre-Haavelmo. So in fact, the modelers used fewer instruments, with-
     out any formal justification.
8    I argued against this way of formulating policy analysis at more length in 1987.
9    I surveyed the state of central bank policy modeling and the use of models in the
     policy process in a 2002 paper.


                                                                                             21


10   The work by Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans circulated in discussion paper form
     for years before its final publication.
11   Smets and Wouters report in their tables only marginal likelihoods for Bayesian
     VAR’s that are at least slightly worse than the marginal likelihood of th DSGE. In
     footnote 13, however, they report that a BVAR with a different prior produces a log
     marginal likelihood better than that of the DSGE by 9.2 in log units, a substantial
     advantage in fit for the BVAR.




22
