Field Experiments and the practice
of Economics

Esther Duflo
Nobel Lecture | December 8, 2019 | Stockholm


As an undergraduate student,
I was not destined to become an economist…




Like many people, I did
not think most
economists were to be
trusted


And yet… 28 years later…


J-PAL directly affected policy in numerous ways,
and almost all continents


               Run a small, well controlled experiment




               Get the results




The strawman
               Prepare a shiny policy brief and peddle to policy makers




               Get full scale adoption


                   Run a small, well controlled experiment
                   “Gold plated experiments”–samples are too small




                   Get the results
                   Results only valid in one place, might not replicate elsewhere;
The strawman       might not even be internally valid (imperfect take up, spillovers
                   on non beneficiaries)
subject to all
sorts of critics   Prepare a shiny policy brief and peddle to policy makers
                   May not fit with the policy makers interest at the time




                   Get full scale adoption
                    Results will be quite different if adopted at scale: equilibrium
                    effects, Political economy effects


But really, it is not the way policy influence works


           The Miracle of Microcredit?




Photo: Kanto | istock.com


Microcredit in the 2000s

                                   The Nobel Peace Prize 2006
                                   Muhammad Yunus, Gameen Bank

                           Today, Grameen Bank gives loans to nearly 7.0 million poor people,
                           97 percent of whom are women in 73,000 villages in Bangladesh.
                           Grameen Bank gives collateral-free income generating, housing,
                           student and micro-enterprise loans to poor families and offers a
                           host of attractive savings, pension funds and insurance products
                           for its members. Since it introduced them in 1984, housing loans
                           have been used to construct 640,000 houses. The legal ownership
                           of these houses belongs to the women themselves. We focused on
                           women because we found giving loans to women always brought
                           more benefits to the family.


                           In a cumulative way the bank has given out loans totaling about US
                           $6.0 billion. The repayment rate is 99%. Grameen Bank routinely
                           makes profit. Financially, it is self-reliant and has not taken donor
                           money since 1995. Deposits and own resources of Grameen Bank
                           today amount to 143 percent of all outstanding loans. According to
                           Grameen Bank’s internal survey, 58 percent of our borrowers have
                           crossed the poverty line.


Then the tone shifted…


The evaluations

•   The first evaluations conducted where
    in India and in the Philippines.
     –   Philippines: rather good
     –   India: rather weak

•   India is a very unique context:
    hotbed of microfinance
•   To get a useful answer, we had to wait…
•   Until seven studies came out together,
    all in different contexts and carried out
    by different teams
•   But published together with the             Photo: i Stock.com

    same outcomes.


Bayesian Hierarchical Modelling of all the MF results:
Profits


                                Posterior mean, 50%
                                interval (box), and 95%
                                interval (line) for each
                                Treatment Effect (USD
                                PPP per 2 weeks)



                                                           Rachel Meager
                                                           LSE


Meta-analysis: Average estimated effect and range,
6 countries
Posterior distribution of average effect




                                           Posterior mean, 50%
                                           interval (box), and 95%
                                           interval (line) for each
                                           Treatment Effect (USD
                                           PPP per 2 weeks)


Changing the debate


Changing microfinance

•   One sized approach (small term loan) does not work for all.
•   Many experiments since then have focused on the terms of lending.
•   Focus on all the financial services the poor need, and the right fit for each
     –   Transaction
     –   Savings
     –   Insurance
     –   Ultra poor programs

•   Focus on heterogeneity: Creating methods to identify real entrepreneurs who
    will benefit from a microcredit.
•   Interplay between theory and experiments is what makes economics useful to
    policy (and policy useful to economics)


           Teaching at the right level




Photo: Arvind Eyunni | Pratham


% Children in Std V who can at least
read at Std II level
All India (rural) – All Children
ASER 2011 to 2016


                                What is the problem?

                                • Teachers can teach        • Children can learn

                                • Salaries are sufficient   • Inputs alone don’t help

                                • Computers can help        • Teachers are willing
                                                              to do better
                                • Parents care




Photo: Aude Guerrucci | J-PAL


Dr. Rukmini Banerji   Dr. Mdhav Chavan


  For 15+ years of experimentation
       2001-2003                                                                   2010-2013
       “Balsakhi” program; Pratham                                                 Ghana trials of teacher-
       community volunteer “pull out”                                              led vs. tutor-led in school
       remedial program in urban schools           2008                            and out of school             2013-2014
                                                   In-school one month                                           “Learning Camps” in
                                                   gov’t teacher-led                                             gov’t primary schools;
                                                   summer camp with                                              led by Pratham teams
                                                   support by rural                                              supported by village
                                                   village volunteers                                            volunteers

2000                                  2005                                2010                                                  2015

                        2005-2006                           2008-2010                          2012-2013
                Village volunteers             In-school gov’t teacher-              Teacher-led model;
          conducted community                led learning improvement                onsite mentoring by
          classes for rural primary              program & support by            gov’t academic officials
                    school children          Pratham volunteers (rural)


Teaching at the right level today


Improving programs that run at scale




                 Helping government address
                 the “plumbing problems”


           Evaluating programs at scale:
           Targeted information to improve rice distribution




Photo: Hector Salazar Salame | J-PAL


Raskin Social Assistance ID Cards

•   Raskin is Indonesia’s US$2.2 billion rice
    subsidy program for poorest families

•   Problem:
     – Poor receive just 30% of the
       intended subsidy
     – Pay 25% more for Raskin




                                                Photo: J-PAL




Experimental design

The experiment varied 4 aspects of the cards
        –    Information on the cards
        –    Who gets the card
        –    Common knowledge through posters
        –    Create impression of accountability



Researchers:




Abhijit Banerjee   Rema Hanna    Jordan Kyle   Benjamin A. Olken   Sudarno Sumarto


Results
Banerjee, Hanna, Kyle, Olken, Sumarto

•   Poor families get 26% increase
    in subsidy

•   Driven by reduction in leakage

•   Cost Effective: $1 for ~$8 increase
    in subsidy




                                          Photo: Ben Ol ken | J-PAL


Scale-up

•   Government rolled out “social
    protection” cards in 2013 to 15.5
    million poor families, reaching 66
    million people

•   Continued partnership to improve
    service delivery, with planned
    evaluations of a new reformed social
    benefit scheme to be implemented
    through electronic vouchers


                                           Photo: Ri tw ik Sarkar | J-PAL


               Reforming the auditing of firms in Gujarat




Photo: J-PAL


 Third party audit




Photos: Vi pin Aw atramani | J-PAL


 Audit system performance

               Suspended particulate matter, mg/Nm3 | A. Control, Midline


          20
                                     Mass: 0.7297
Percent




          10




          0
                          100             200            300                400


The reform we proposed
Duflo, Greenstone, Pande, Ryan

1. Random assignment of auditors and fixed payments from a central pool

2. Back check auditors for accuracy

3. Payment (or continuation with the scheme) based on accuracy

       –       Ideas based on basic economics, and a solid understanding of the institutions



Researchers:




Esther Duflo          Michael Greenstone   Rohini Pande   Nicholas Ryan


Impact of the reform
                  Suspended particulate matter, mg/Nm3 | A. Control, Midline
             20
                                       Mass: 0.7297
   Percent




             10


             0
                           100              200              300               400

                                         Backchecks
             20
                                       Mass: 0.1892
   Percent




             10


             0
                           100              200              300               400


Fostering a culture of learning inside Governments

•   Many governments have launched either long run partnership
    with J-PAL or their own “learning units” (e.g. Minedulab in Peru,
    Tamil Nadu research partnership).

•   World Bank Supports hundreds of RCT and training with
    various governments

•   Many of the governments we meet want us to run an RCT,
    rather than listen to any evidence we might bring.

•   May be one day we can make ourselves irrelevant…


Photo: Aude Guerrucci | J-PAL
