MONEY AND FINANCE
IN THE MACRO-ECONOMIC PROCESS
Nobel Memorial Lecture, 8 December, 1981


JAMES TOBIN
Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, U.S.A.



1. I N T R O D U C T I O N : A N A L Y T I C A L F R A M E W O R K S I N M A C R O -
ECONOMICS AND MONETARY THEORY

The historic terrain of macro-economic theory is the explanation of the levels
and fluctuations of overall economic activity. Macro-economists have been
especially interested in the effects of alternative fiscal, financial, and monetary
policies. With the publication of J. M. Keynes’s       General Theory in 1936 and the
mathematical formalizations of his theory by J. R. Hicks (1937) and others, the
language of macro-economic theory became systems of simultaneous equa-
tions. These are general equilibrium systems of interdependence in the sense that
the relationships describe an entire national economy, not just a particular
industry or sector. The systems are usually not completely closed; they depend
on exogenous parameters including instruments controlled by policy-makers.
Seeking definite relationships of economic outcomes to policies and other
exogenous variables, qualitative and quantitative, these models sacrifice detail
and generality, limiting the number of variables and equations by aggregations
over agents, commodities, assets, and time.
   Theoretical macro-economic models of one brand or another are very influ-
ential. They guide the architects of econometric forecasting models. They
shape the thinking of policy-makers and their advisers about “the way the
world works.” They color the views          of journalists, managers, teachers, house-
wives, politicians, and voters. Almost everyone thinks about the economy, tries
to understand it, and has opinions how to improve its performance. Anyone
who does so uses a model, even if it is vague and informal.

1.1 The Keynes-Hicks Model and an Alternative Framework
Hicks’s (1937) "IS-LM" version of Keynesian and classical theories has been
especially influential, reaching not just professional economists but, as the
standard macro-model of textbooks, also generations of college students. Its

I am indebted to Kenneth Warwick for compiling Tables 1 and 2, and to Laura Harrison and
Glena Ames for efficiently preparing the manuscript of the Lecture under great pressure of time.
Research reported here was supported by ‘the National Science Foundation and the Cowles
Foundation. Among my many intellectual debts, I mention here only my long partnership with
William Brainard. Although his influence pervades the paper, he is not responsible for errors of
commission and omission, except that there would be fewer if time had permitted him to read and
comment.


                                       J. Tobin                                        13


simple apparatus is the trained intuition of many of us when we confront
questions of policy and analysis, whatever more elaborate methods we may
employ in further study. But the framework has a number of defects that have
limited its usefulness and subjected it to attack. In this lecture I wish to
describe an alternative framework, which tries to repair some of those defects.
At the same time, I shall argue, the major conclusions of the Keynes-Hicks
apparatus remain intact. The reconstruction I shall summarize has engaged
me for a long time, and I will of necessity draw on previous work.
   The principal features that differentiate the proposed framework from the
standard macro-model are these:
   Precision regarding time. A model of short-run determination of macro-econom-
ic activity necessarily refers to a slice of time. It is one step of a dynamic
sequence, not a repetitive equilibrium into which the economy settles.
   Tracking of stocks. An essential part of the process is the dynamics of flows and
stocks, investment and capital, saving and wealth, specific forms of saving and
asset stocks. It is not generally defensible to ignore these relations on the excuse
that the analysis refers to so short a time that stocks cannot change significant-
ly.
   Several assets and rates of return. The traditional aggregation of all non-mone-
tary assets into a single asset with a common interest rate does not permit
analysis of some important policies, institutional structures, and events. My
alternative framework can in principle accommodate as many distinct asset
categories as appropriate for the purpose at hand, though the illustrative
application set forth below distinguishes only four. Asset disaggregation is
essential for analyzing, among other phenomena, financing of capital accumu-
lation and government deficits, details of monetary and debt management
policies, international capital movements and foreign exchange markets, and
financial intermediation.
   Modeling of financial and monetary policy operations. Too often macro-economic
models describe monetary policy as a stock M whose time path is chosen
autonomously by a central authority, without clearly describing the operations
that implement the policy. In fact money supplies are changed by government
transactions with the public in which goods or non-monetary financial assets
are exchanged for money, or by similar transactions between banks and the
non-bank public. What transactions are the sources of variation of money
stocks makes a difference, depending on how they alter the wealth and portfolio
positions of economic agents.
   Walras’s Law and adding-up constraints. "Walras’s Law" says that the excess
demand functions of an economic agent must sum to zero for every vector of the
variables that are arguments in any of the functions. The “law” imposes the
consistency of meeting the budget constraint on the schedules of demand or
supply which the agent communicates to all the markets in which she partici-
pates. For the asset markets modeled below, for example, the implication is
 that household demands for end-of-period holdings of the several assets sum to
household demand for end-of-period wealth, for every set of values of the
determinants of asset and wealth demands. This implies that the partial


14                                 Economic Sciences 1981


derivatives of asset demands with respect to, say, any interest rate must add up
to the partial derivative of wealth demand with respect to the same variable.
  As my collaborator William Brainard and I observed (1968), this consisten-
cy requirement is not always explicitly observed in theoretical and statistical
models of financial markets. If demand functions are not explicitly specified for
the whole range of assets, the function for the omitted category implied by the
wealth demand function and the explicit asset functions may be strange in ways
unintended by the model-builders. For example, if money demand is related
negatively to an interest rate and total wealth demand is not, the implication is
that non-money asset functions carry the mirror image of the interest effect on
money. The best practice is to write down all the functions explicitly, even
though one is redundant, and to put the same arguments in all the functions.

 1.2 Microfoundations, Aggregation, and Expectations
J. R. Hicks’ 1935 article has been an inspiration and challenge to me and many
 other monetary economists. It stimulated us to look for the properties and
 functions of money, and of promises to pay money in future, that underlie
 people’s willingness to hold these assets. Understanding these foundations, we
 could seek the observable determinants of demands for money and money
 substitutes. This quest for the microfoundations of monetary theory has moti-
 vated inventory-theoretic models of the demand for transactions media (Bau-
 mol, 1952; Tobin, 1956; Miller and Orr, 1966)          and models of portfolio choice
 (Tobin, 1958). It is still unfinished. The reason, I think, is the difficulty of
 explaining within the basic paradigms of economic theory why paper that
 makes no intrinsic contribution to utility or technology is held at all and has
 positive value in exchange for goods and services. I certainly have no solution
 to that deep question, 1 nor do I regard one as prerequisite to pragmatic
 monetary theory.
    For this and other reasons, macro-economic models of the type I am advo-
 cating are, I admit, only loosely linked to optimizing behavior of individual
 agents. Following an older tradition, economy-wide structural equations are an
 amalgam of individual behavior and aggregation across a multitude of diverse
 individuals. This is the pragmatic alternative to two other procedures, both
 with serious disadvantages. One is to preserve the diversity of agents’ prefer-
 ences and endowments allowed in fully general equilibrium models; the weak
 restrictions that optimization places on individual excess demands imply no
 restrictions at all on market-wide schedules. The other is to assume that all
 agents are alike or fall into two or three classes (old and young, for example)
 internally homogeneous but differing from each other in arbitrarily specified
 ways. Although set-ups of this kind (the Samuelson 1958 overlapping genera-
 tion model, for example) are promising and already generate instructive par-
 ables, they are still so abstract and arbitrary as to be useless for policy analysis
  and econometric model-building.

1
 Hahn (1965, 1971, 1973a, 1973 b) has been an insightful contributor to the literature of this
subject. The proceedings of a recent conference on it are reported in Kareken and Wallace (1980).


                                         J. Tobin                                       15

   Another influential methodological wave in current macro-economics is the
emphasis on information and expectations, and on the desirability of building
models in which agents’ behavior is grounded on the information about the
present and future which, according to the model itself, would be revealed to
the agents (Lucas, 1976). This is a good principle, but my own efforts to
construct an improved framework have had a different purpose and emphasis.
The system I shall display in this lecture involves expectations, recognizing as
any analysis of financial behavior must that the attractiveness of various assets
to savers and portfolio managers depends on their estimates of the joint
probability distributions of the assets’ earnings and capital gains. The conse-
quences of variation of these expectations can be traced, for example if moods,
confidence, and “animal spirits” change exogenously, as Keynes thought they
frequently do. In dynamic applications and simulations, Lucas’s principles of
rational expectations could be respected, but I have not done so in the work I
will report here.

1.3. Macro-Economics and Full General Equilibrium
Kenneth Arrow’s Nobel lecture of 1972 is an elegant exposition of general
equilibrium theory, recognizing both its power and its limitations. Were there a
full set of simultaneously cleared markets for all commodities, including com-
modities for future and contingent delivery, there would be no macro-economic
problems, no need for money, and no room for fiscal and monetary policies of
stabilization. Theorists who take full general equilibrium as their reference
point naturally seek to explain alien phenomena as “market failures”. Arrow
discussed the inability of decentralized competitive markets to supply collective
or public goods in optimal amounts.         T h e public-good nature of common
monetary units of account and universally acceptable media of exchange is, I
believe, one reason why the general equilibrium paradigm has trouble incorpo-
rating money. But the departure from that paradigm that I would emphasize,
the departure that sets the stage for macro-economic theory and policy, is one
emphasized by Keynes. It is the virtual absence of futures markets and of
course contingent markets in any commodities other than money itself. As
Keynes said (1936, pp. 210-212),


An act of individual saving means - so to speak - a decision not to have dinner today.
But it does not necessitate a decision to have dinner or to buy a pair of boots a week
hence or a year hence or to consume any specified thing at any specified date. Thus it
depresses the business of preparing today’s dinner without stimulating the business of
making ready for some future act of consumption. It is not a substitution of future
consumption-demand for present consumption-demand, - it is a net diminution of such
demand ... If saving consisted not merely in abstaining from present consumption but
in placing simultaneously a specific order for future consumption, the effect might
indeed be different. For in that case the expectation of some future yield from investment
would be improved, and the resources released from preparing for present consumption
would be turned over to preparing for the future consumption..
   The trouble arises, therefore, because the act of saving implies, not a substitution for
present consumption of some specific additional consumption which requires for its
preparation just as much immediate economic activity as would have been required by


16                                Economic Sciences 1981


present consumption equal in value to the sum saved, but a desire for “wealth” as such,
that is for a potentiality of consuming an unspecified article at an unspecified time.

In short, the financial and capital markets, are at their best highly imperfect
coordinators of saving and investment, an inadequacy which I suspect cannot
be remedied by rational expectations. This failure of coordination is a funda-
mental source of macro-economic instability and of the opportunity for macro-
economic policies of stabilization. Current macro-economic theory perhaps
pays too exclusive attention to labor markets, where Keynes also detected
failures of competition to coordinate demand and supply.

1.4 Statistics of Flows and Stocks of Funds
National income accounts, developed in the inter-war period, provided the
data for testing and estimating the models of Keynes and subsequent macro-
economists. Both theory and data dealt mainly with flows and their interrela-
tions. Flow-of-funds accounts, notably those compiled by the United States
Federal Reserve System since 1949, provide stock and flow data relevant to
theoretical models of financial markets, the observations we seek to understand
and explain.
   In Tables 1 and 2 I show data for 1979, condensed into smaller numbers of
sectors (columns) and asset categories (rows) than the Federal Reserve actually
reports. In Table 1 there are 9 sectors and 11 assets, the level of aggregation of
a model that our group at Yale has been trying to estimate (Backus         et al., 1980).
In Table 2 the data are further aggregated, into four sectors and four assets,
conforming as closely as possible to the theoretical model I shall be discussing
here.
   In the format of these tables, a column represents a sector’s balance sheet
(stocks) or sources and uses of funds (flows). A row distributes the stock or flow
of an asset over the supplying and demanding sectors. The task of theory and
estimation is to bring the columns to life by functions relating sectoral portfolio
and saving decisions to relevant variables, and to bring the rows to life as a set
of simultaneous market-clearing equations. 2




2
 See Backus et al. (1980), Brainard and Smith (1979), Smith and Brainard (1974, 1976), Backus
and Purvis (1980), and Friedman (1977, 1980).


        Table I. Flow of Funds Matrix for Eleven Assets and Nine Sectors, 1979
        Flows at Annual rates, End-of-Year Stocks in Parentheses (billions of dollars)

                        I              Households     Commercial   Savings      Insurance & Miscellaneous Businesses   Federal  State & Local Rest of                    Discrepancy
                                                         Banking Institutions Pension Funds Intermediaries           Government Government the World
 (1)    Currency &                              7.9          1.3                                                                     -9.2                                          0
        Reserves                            (107.1)        (46.8)                                                                 (- 153.9)                                        (0)
 (2)    Demand                                 15.1       -25.8           -0.7                             0.7            5.5          0.4       -1.5           4.4
        Deposits                            (145.4)     (-330.2)           (0.6)                           (6.9)        (87.4)        (14.3)       (9.6)       (23.4)              (31.2)
 (3)    Small Time                            61.4        -31.0         -29.9                                                          0.1       -0.6                               0
        Deposits                          (1049.2)      (-421.1)      (-632.9)                                                         (1.0)       (3.8)                            (0)
 (4)    Shorts                                85. I       -30.7         -13.5                 -0.7       -12.3           2.8        -10.5          2.0      -27.1                 +4.9
                                            (295.6)     (-276 4)        (-4.4)                (25.9)    (-53.0)        (61.5)     (-216.2)        (90.9)      (35.1)             (+41.0)
        Longs                                 39.6          15.2           0.2                 46.9       -2.6        -26.3         -68.4        -6.4           1.7                 0.1
                                            (246.3)       (226.8)        (76.9)              (492.4)    (-39.0)     (-353.2)      (-464.5)     (<232.7)       (47.0)                (0)
 (6a)   Nonfinancial                        -206.            0. I        -0.1                  54.8       -3.4        -36.9                                    6.3                -0.2
        Business
        Equity:
        Purchases
 (6b)   Nonfinancial                         151.8         -0. I                            -28.0          6.3         -129.4                                 -0.8                 0.2
        Equity:                             (748.2)         (0.1)          (4.2)            (200.3)      ( 3 4 . 1 ) (- 1029.5)                                (42.7)             ( - 0 . 1 )
        Capital Gains
 (7)    Financial                             21.0         -7.5                               -7.4        -6.8                                                  0.6                 0.1      2
        Business                            (148.3)      (-72.3)           (0.5)            (-41.4)     (-40.7)                                                 (5.5)             (-0.1)     g
        Equity
 (8)    Nonmarketables                        79.2             -             -               -71.8                                   -7.4                                           0
                                            (889.5)                                        (-732.9)                               (- 156.6)                                          (0)
 (9)    Mortgages                          - 104.9           31.1         48.5                 14.2        0.1        -41.3          46. I         6.3                            -0.1
                                          (-771.6)        (245.2)       (569.1)              (132.1)     (14.4)     (-428.1)        (215.7)       (23.2)                             (0)
(10)    Loans                               -54.8            66.3          3.9                  8.0       27.6        -52.4           13.7       - 1.6        -3.6                -7.1
                                         (-486.1))        1610.0)        (60. I)              (60. 1)   (134.7)     (-295.5)        (101.9)     (-22.7)      (-88.1)             (-74.4)
(11)    Foreign                                3.6          -0.8’           -                                            23.8           1.2                  -25.4                -2.4
        Assets                               (14.8)          (1.0)                                                     (175.6)        (28.4)               (-229.4))                 (9.6)
(12)    Miscellaneous                          7.2        -18.1           -4.0               - 17.8       -9.4          -7.2           9.0          1.3        23.5                15.5
        (Domestic)                           (66.7)      (-29.9)        (-24.4)            (- 147.9)    (-57.5)           (3.1)      (64.9)       (13.1)       (66.9)            (+45.0)
                                                                                                                                                                                     11.0
(13)    Financial                            291.6           0.0            4.4                 0.1        0.2     -261.4           -25.0         -0.5       -20.4                (52.4)
        Net Worth                         (2453.4)          (0.0)         (49.7)               (0.0)     (-0.1) (-I 778.7)        (-565.0)     (-114.8)      (-96.9)     11.0
                                                                                                                                                                        (52.4)
(6b)    -Capital Gains                       151.8         -0. I                   -28.0                   6.3       -129.4                                   -0.8
        Net
(14)    = Financial                          139.8           0.1            4.4                28. I     -6.1        -132.0        -25.0         -0.5        - 19.6
        Saving


18                                   Economic Sciences 1981


Notes to table 1

Source: Flow of Funds Accounts, Federal Reserve, 1981.
Notes & Definitions
      (1) Base money. Currency held by the nonbank public has been allocated entirely to
          households.
      (2) Demand deposits include checkable deposits at both commercial banks and savings
          institutions.
      (3) Small time deposits include all time and savings deposits of less than $100,000 at
          commercial banks and thrift institutions.
      (4) ‘Shorts’ include short-term government securities, federal funds and security repurchase
          agreements, time deposits in excess of $100,000, money market fund shares, eurodollar
          deposits, commercial paper and bankers’ acceptances.
      (5) ‘Longs’ include longer-term government and agency securities, state and local govern-
          ment obligations and corporate bonds.
      (6) ‘Equity’ includes only the equity liability of nonfinancial corporate business (NFC).
          Equity of financial business is shown separately in row 7.
      (8) ‘Nonmarketables’ include U.S. savings bonds and insurance and pension reserves.
     (10) ‘Loans’ consist mainly of consumer credit, trade credit, security credit, bank loans not
          elsewhere classified and U.S. government and agency loans. The discrepancy in this row
          is due to trade credit.
     (11) Foreign assets are claims held by the U.S. on foreigners, denominated in foreign curren-
          cies. Included are foreign deposits, foreign equity, direct investment abroad and U.S.
          foreign exchange and net IMF position.
 (6), (7) The following procedures and assumptions were used in order to separate out equity of
          nonfinancial corporations NFCs from equity of financial institutions (FI).
                (i) Equity issued by rest of world (ROW) and Open-end investment companies
                    (OEICs) (mutual funds) was allocated to households.
               (ii) The division of remaining equity liability between NFC and FI was made by
                    taking the equity liability of FIs to be equal to their reported net worth, the
                    residual being allocated to business.
              (iii) Business equity was then allocated to holders in proportion to their total holdings
                    of equity (excluding equity issued by OEICs and ROW).
              (iv) Purchases of equity were treated similarly (although in this case data on equity
                    issue of business are directly available).
               (v) In addition, retained earnings of business were treated as an issue of equity and
                    allocated to holders in proportion to their holdings of business equity.
              (vi) Capital gains are derived as the difference between the change in business equity
                    holdings/liability and purchases (including retained earnings).
     (14) ‘Net financial saving’ as shown in the table will differ from National Income and Product,
           Account figures for several reasons-conceptual differences between NIPA and the Flow
           of Funds Accounts; unallocated discrepancies in the FFA; capital gains in assets other
           than business equity; and the treatment here of business retained earnings as an issue of
           equity by business and saving by other sectors.


                                               J. Tobin                                              19


Table 2. Flow of Funds Matrix for Four-Asset Model, 1979
Flows at Annual Rates, End-of-Year Stocks in Parentheses (billions of Dollars)
                                   “House- Business Govern- Rest of    Discrepancy
                                   holds”           ment     the World
         Purchases                    50.9         -58.1                     7.3            -0.1
Equity
         Capital                     130.0     -129.4                      -0.8              0.2
         Gains                     (1 314.0) (-1369.0)                   (54.9)              (0.1)
Bonds                                103.1           -2.3    -83.3        -22.5               5.0
                                    (616.9)          (47.7) (-822.4)      (116.9)           (40.9)
Foreign Assets                          6.7          23.8    1.2    -29.3                   -2.4
                                      (62.8)       (175.6) (28.4) (-276.4)                   (9.6)
Base Money                             9.2                     -9.2                          0
                                    (153.9)                 (- 153.9)                        (0)
Miscellaneous                         -3.8          -95.4    65.9          25.0              8.3
                                     (355.6)      (-633.0) (268.2)          (7.8)            (1.4)
                                                                                             11.0
Financial                            296.1         -261.4         -25.4     -20.3      11.0 (52.0)
Net Worth                          (2503.2)       ( 1 7 7 8 . 7 ) (-679.7) (-96.8) ( 5 2 . 0 )
-Capital Gains                       130.0        - 1 2 9 . 4      -       -0.8
= Net Financial                      166.1        -132.0     -25.4        - 19.5
  Saving

Source: Flow of Funds Accounts, Federal Reserve, 1981.
Notes:
(1) “Households” includes the household sector and the financial sector.
(2) Differences may arise between this and the previous table due to rounding.
(3) Corporate bonds are included in the equity row. Corporate bonds issued by financial institu-
    tions are assumed to be entirely held by households, i.e., foreigners are assumed not to hold
    any. All foreign corporate bond issues are assumed to be held by “households” and are
    classified as foreign assets in this table.
(4) It is not possible to identify capital gains for corporate bonds from the Flow of Funds Accounts.
(5) “Miscellaneous” includes demand deposits, small time deposits, mortgages, loans, nonmarket-
    ables, equity liability of financial business, and other miscellaneous assets.


2. A MULTI-ASSET MODEL OF THE DETERMINATION OF
OUTPUT AND PRICES IN THE SHORT RUN

2.1 Sources of New Supplies of Private Wealth
There are three sources of supply of new financial wealth to private households
in a modern capitalist economy: (I) net accumulation of goods in inventories or
productive capital, (D) government budget deficits, and (CAS) surpluses in
current account transactions with other nations. (All symbols and equations
are listed at the end of the paper.) By financial wealth I refer to negotiable
assets, whether real properties or paper claims (of which negative holdings are
liabilities). I exclude illiquid assets such as future labor earnings (human
capital) and entitlements to future government transfers, and prospective tax
liabilities. During any period of time (t) household saving is the sum of the
three items:


20                              Economic Sciences I981


                                                           National income identity

Since in any period of time saving is also the excess of net national income Y
over consumption C plus taxes T, and the deficit D is the difference between
government purchases of goods and services G and taxes T,               the accounting
identity (1) can also be written as:

(2)                                                        National income identity

In either form the identity becomes an equation if any or all of its constituents
are expressed as functions of economic variables. Then the equation will be
satisfied only for certain sets of values of those variables. On this interpretation
(1) or (2) is the familiar “IS” locus introduced by Hicks (1937).
   Let me be more precise about the three sources of asset supply on the right
hand side of (1). The illustrative model I wish to describe contains, I believe,
the highest degree of asset aggregation compatible with analyzing the central
issues of macroeconomics, in particular the workings of fiscal and monetary
policies. Later in the paper I shall discuss several directions of disaggregation. I
distinguish just four assets: equities, titles to physical capital and its earnings,
generated by investment I; government bonds and base money, issued to finance
deficits D; and foreign currency assets, earned by the current account surplus CAS,
consisting of the trade surplus X and earnings on the foreign assets themselves.
   In reality of course, none of these categories is internally homogeneous.
Physical capital takes many different forms, and so do the             claims to them -
direct titles, debts, and shares. Government securities vary in maturities and
other terms. International claims and debts are even more heterogeneous.
Moreover, banks and other financial intermediaries transform the liabilities of
business, governments, and foreigners into a variety of obligations to suit the
tastes and circumstances of household savers. Representing these complex
realities by four assets is a great abstraction, comparable to many others in
macro-economics. In its defense, I remind you that the common textbook
macro-model limits itself to two asset categories, money and everything else.
That is, all nonmonetary assets and debts are, in the Hicksian “IS-LM”
formalization of Keyne’s General Theory, taken to be perfect substitutes at a
common interest rate plus or minus exogenous interest differentials.

2.2 Claims to Productive Capital
Private capital investment is the source of new claims to physical capital,
modeled as equity shares, one share for each unit of capital. The aggregate
stock of capital at any time consists of all surviving durable or storable goods,
previously produced or imported but not consumed. These stocks are valued
continuously in markets for the goods themselves (realistic examples are used
vehicles and machinery, and existing residences and other buildings) and in
markets for corporate securities or for entire businesses. These market valu-
ations of old capital goods typically differ, up or down, from their replacement
costs, i.e., from the costs of producing, and installing at a normal pace, new
capital goods of the same type. These deviations are, in turn, the incentives for


                                          J. Tobin                                       21

rates of investment faster or slower than normal. When equity markets place
high values on capital goods, the margin above replacement cost induces
investors to speed up capital accumulation . This inducement is essentially
what the great Swedish economist Knut Wicksell ascribed to a natural rate of
interest higher than the market interest rate.
   However, there is a limit to the acceleration of capital formation generated
by arbitrage of such margins. Abnormally rapid accumulations of capital,
exceptionally high rates of investment, impose extra costs on investing firms
individually and on the economy collectively. These adjustment costs are a
principal reason that positive differences of market valuations from normal
replacement costs of capital can and do arise and persist, without triggering
virtually instantaneous jumps in capital stock accomplished at virtually infinite
rates of investment. Likewise low market valuations of existing capital slow
down capital formation, but rarely shut gross investment off completely while
stocks are consumed at maximum speed.
   The account I have just sketched refers to replacement costs as current costs
of production and installation at a normal rate of investment. By normal rate I
mean investment that keeps the capital stock growing at the trend of the
economy, in Harrod’s terminology the “natural” growth rate of its exogenous
resources as augmented by technological progress. The upshot, for purposes of
a simple macroeconomic model, is an equation for net investment as follows:




where:

      q’:     is the ratio of market valuation of capital goods to normal replacement
              cost at time period t. Its normal value is 1, and the value that induces
              zero gross investment is q = f-‘(4).
  K   t - 1   is the stock, valued at normal replacement cost, at the beginning of
              period t. The supply of productive services of capital available in
              period t is proportional to Kt-i.
   ∆ K,       is the addition of Kt-i occurring in period t.
      6       is the rate of depreciation of capital.
      g       is the natural rate of growth of the economy.

(When no confusion can arise, I suppress the subscripts t and denote values of
a variable in the preceeding, current, and next periods as      x-i, x, x+i.) Note
that investment is valued at asset market prices rather than normal replace-
ment costs both in (3) and in the national income accounting identities (1) and
(2). The reason is that the deviations of q      k
                                                   from 1 represent real costs of


22                                Economic Sciences 1981


adjustment, including positive or negative rents, incurred by investing firms in
changing the size of their installed capital. 3

2.3 The Financing of Government Deficits
Fiscal policy concerns the size of government expenditures and tax receipts,
and the stocks and flows of assets issued by the government to finance budget
deficits. Monetary policy concerns the composition of privately owned assets of
government issue, in particular the relative amounts of monetary issue and
non-monetary public debt. Governmental monetary actions, whether taken by
Treasury Departments or Finance Ministries or by central banks, determine
the proportions in which a current deficit is financed by monetary and non-
monetary issues. Open market operations also change the composition of the
existing debt.
   Clearly it is not possible to model monetary policies, distinct from fiscal
policies, without explicit allowance for at least one non-monetary government
obligation. (The theoretical literature contains many models in which govern-
ment deficits can be met only by printing money. Though the consequences of
greater or lesser budget deficits in these models are sometimes attributed to
“monetary” policies and money growth rates, the primitive asset structure
assumed confounds monetary and fiscal policy and excludes operations de-
scribable as “monetary” in the usual understanding of the word.) In the four-
asset model I am now describing, I take the non-monetary government debt to
consist of perpetual bonds or        "consols" - promises to pay one dollar each
period forever. The government’s aggregate obligation to pay these coupons in
period t is the number of bonds outstanding at the end of the previous period,
B-1. The market price of a consol in dollars is q      B
                                                         .
   The government’s monetary issue corresponds to the usual concept of high-
powered or base money, currency or its equivalent in central bank deposit
liabilities. Base money bears a zero own-rate of interest. I have in mind a fiat
issue, not one convertible on demand into gold or any other commodity.
However, in a fixed-rate foreign exchange regime, the local currency is in effect
convertible into foreign currency. The counterpart of the market price of bonds
would be q H, but it is identically equal to 1. The size and market value of the
outstanding stock of high-powered money are both           H-i.
   In reminding you at the outset of the national income accounting identity, I
defined the deficit as G, government purchases, less tax revenues T. In this
reckoning taxes are net of the government’s transfer payments, which are
negative taxes in the sense that the recipients have no contemporaneous
reciprocal obligation to render goods and services to the government. Public
debt interest might be regarded either as the purchase of a service or as a


3
  The so-called “q” theory of investment was introduced as such in Tobin and Brainard (1968)
and has been further discussed and applied in Tobin (1969), Tobin and Brainard (1977), Tobin
(1978), Ciccolo (1975), Ciccolo and Fromm (1979), Malkiel, von Furstenberg, and Watson (1979),
von Furstenberg (1977), Summers (1981), Abel (1980), and by many other writers. Since it is a
straightforward application of the neoclassical theory of the firm, it has many precursors.


                                        J. Tobin                                     23


transfer payment. For my purpose, it is best to treat it as a transfer but to keep
track of it separately.
   A government may own marketable assets and earn income from them. I
assume in this simplest model that the government does not buy or sell or own
physical capital or privately issued equities or debts. But to model fiscal and
monetary policy in an open economy it is necessary to allow for government
transactions in foreign-currency assets and for its holdings of such assets as
international reserves. These are represented as the fourth asset of the model.
The government’s holdings at the beginning of period t are             GF-, in units of
foreign currency, valued in period t at         e.cF-, where e is the domestic -
currency price of a unit of foreign currency. Conceivably     & 1 is negative, i.e.,
the government is a net debtor to foreigners. In any case, if     eF is the foreign-
currency yield, the government’s income on its reserves is      eQF.GF-,
  Thus the budget deficit in dollars is, for commodity price level p:

(4)                                                              Government deficit

Here the parameters of fiscal policy are the relationships established by legisla-
tion defining purchases and taxes-less-transfers as functions        (.) of economic
variables. For example, G(.) may be each period an ad hoc constant G, while
T(.) may be a function of contemporaneous real income, and of other current
and past variables (including p for nominal tax and transfer systems neither
indexed nor rapidly adjusted).
   The deficit must be financed by transactions at current asset prices in the
three assets high-powered money, consols, and foreign currency:

(5)                                                                Government deficit


                                                                Supply of base money

                                                                      Supply of bonds

                                                           Supply offoreign currency
                                                           assets by government

   Here there are three independent parameters of monetary policy. One of
them, say y*, which also fixes yB, determines the share of the current deficit
financed by monetary issue. It is assumed that there is no systematic policy of
financing budget deficits by selling foreign currency assets or borrowing in
foreign currency. The other two policy parameters, say z              H
                                                                        and z F, which
together fix z , describe open market operations. A domestic open market
                B



purchase of government bonds is a positive z        H
                                                      offset by a negative z B of equal
size. Intervention in the foreign exchange market to sell domestic currency for
foreign currency assets is a positive z   H
                                            offset by a negative z F of equal size. A
“sterilized” acquisition of foreign currency assets is a positive z        B
                                                                             offset by a
negative z of equal size.
            F


24                             Economic Sciences 1981


2.4. Supply of Foreign Currency Assets to the Public
At this stage I assume that all capital transactions between the economy
described by the model and the rest of the world occur in foreign currency
assets. The new supply of foreign currency to the economy as a whole, includ-
ing both government and private agents, is its surplus on current account. This
in turn consists of its surplus in commodity trade plus its earnings on existing
foreign-currency holdings. Expressed in current domestic prices, the current
account surplus is:

(9)                                                           Balance of payments

Here F without the prefix subscript G refers to foreign-currency asset holdings
of domestic private individuals. X(.) is the real trade surplus in domestic
currency, a function of local economic activity, specifically of real national
income Y, and of the real exchange rate ep F/p (where p F is the foreign-currency
price of foreign tradable goods) , as well as of other variables, lagged and
contemporary, foreign and domestic. The sign of the relationship of X to the
real exchange rate depends , as is well-known, on various elasticities; it is
positive if excess-demand elasticities are high enough so that real devaluation
improves the trade balance.
   Using the relationships in the previous subsection, I derive from (8) and (9)
the supply of foreign assets to the public:
                                                                   Supply of
(10)                                                               foreign currency
                                                                   assets to public

2.5. Total Saving
Equations (3), (6), (7) and (10) g ive the additional supplies in period t of the
four assets, equities, base money , consol bonds, and foreign currency. In
constant dollars they add to I t + Dt + CASt, as in the national income identity
(1).

2.6. Demands for Asset Accumulations
The next step is to specify the demands for added holdings of the four assets, to
match the added supplies described in 2.1-2.5. Since the sum of the four
supply flows is total saving, specifying the four demands also implies a total
saving function. Of course saving, specific or general, is not identical to
increment in wealth. Asset holders also make capital gains or losses, some
anticipated and others unexpected.
   I assume that households seek for each asset J (= K, B, F, H) a desired end-
of period holding p,Al, in market value at current-period asset prices in dollars.
The A/ are functions; they jointly express fundamental portfolio management
and wealth accumulation behavior. Households enter period t with certain
holdings of the various assets, J1-i. These will turn out to be worth d Jt-, where d
is the dollar price of asset J determined in period t. Thus the net demand for new
assets, ql AJ, in dollar value, is P,A/-qiJrml. It is this vector which must be
equated to the supplies described in the previous section.


                                           J. Tobin                                        25


   The four-equation system for a period t is given in detail below, now in real
terms rather than in dollars
                                                                   Demand = supply
                                                                  equations:
                                                                   Equities market




                                                                        Bond market




                                                                        Base money
                                                                        market


Their summation is the IS relation:




Here WY, is the sum of the second left-hand-side terms of the four preceding
equations, i.e., the value at period t prices of the assets inherited from the past.

  Recall also the expression for the deficit D:

                                                                             Deficit defined



2.7. Gross Substitutability among Assets: Effects of Expected Returns
What are the arguments in the A J functions? In principle, the same vector
appears in all the functions. The vector will include four kinds of variables:
those that are within-period endogenous , i.e., those whose values are deter-
mined by solving a set of simultaneous equations including the four equations
(11) to (14); lagged values of within-period endogenous variables; expected
future values ofwithin-period endogenous variables; exogenous variables, past,
contemporaneous, or future. The fact that A         W
                                                      is the sum of the A J means that
(15) could be substituted for any of the previous four equations. It also means
that the partial derivative of wealth demand with respect to any determining
variable is the sum of the partial derivatives of specific asset demands with
respect to the same variable. For example, the four specific marginal propensi-
ties to save from income sum to the overall marginal propensity to save.
   Among the arguments in each asset demand function will be the several real
yields expected from holding an asset one period, the vector (r             K
                                                                              , rB , rF, rH ).
These involve expectations of commodity and asset prices in period t+1, as
follows:


26                              Economic Sciences 1981


                                                                Equities, price and rate
                                                                of return


Holding of capital equity costing q: from t to t+ 1 entitles the owner to receive
the earnings R,, which depend on the output Y produced in period t by use of the
capital stock K,-,, and to sell the shares at a real price expected to be Eq: 1.

(18)                                                     Bonds, price and rate of return

                                                         Foreign currency assets, price
                                                         and rate of return

                                                         Base money, rate of return



With these relationships the asset prices (q K , qB , e) in (11)-(14) can be
expressed in terms of the r J vector, or vice versa. Clearly for given price
expectations, there is an inverse relation between the current price and the real
one-period expected yield on each asset . This remains true so long as the
elasticity of expected asset price with respect to current price is less than 1. For
equities and bonds it is true even if the elasticity equals or somewhat exceeds 1.
   The assumption that the assets are gross substitutes means that the partial
derivative of A J is positive with respect to its own yield r J but non-positive with
respect to other yields r L (L ≠ J). In the present context this is a stronger
assumption than it is for asset stock demands that are constrained to add to a
constant independent of the vector of determining variables. Here the partial
derivatives, own and cross, with respect to any expected yield sum to the total
effect of that yield on desired end-of-period wealth. The gross substitutes
assumption implies that the total effect is non-negative, and further that any
effect of a single interest rate on wealth demand takes the form of demand for
the asset whose interest yield has increased without spillover into the other
assets, whose yields have not. These are plausible assumptions, and they are
consistent with but not required by rational portfolio and saving behavior.
   Portfolio theory provides a loose rationale for modeling distinct assets as
imperfect substitutes, held jointly in positive amounts even though their ex-
pected yields differ (Markowitz, 1952 and 1959; Tobin, 1958). It also provides
a rationale for dependence of portfolio demands on the structure of expected
yields. But it does not dictate that assets be gross substitutes. Assets with strong
negative covariance of yields could be complements, with a rise in the expected
return on one inducing an increase in a hedged package which includes both.
Even in the absence of covariance complementarity, the income effects of an
increase in the expected yield of one asset might cause the gross substitutes
assumption to fail. For these reasons gross substitutability is, for asset demands
as for consumption goods demands, a more restrictive assumption than utility
maximization.


                                           J. Tobin                                         27


2.8. Other Determinants of Asset Demands
The asset demand functions A J are not necessarily the permanent portofolios
households would choose at the prevailing values of expected yields and other
determining variables. In any short period of time, they will adjust only
partially to new information about the financial environment. Lags in response
are rational in view of the costs of transactions and decisions. For example,
when capital gains and losses alter portfolio shares, portfolio managers may be
slow to make corrective transactions. For these reasons the A           J
                                                                          will be multi-
variate stock adjustment functions and involve the vector of initial holdings
J-t. One would generally expect the own effect of an initial stock to be negative
and the cross effects positive, with the own effects dominating in the summary
wealth demand function A W.
    Current and recent real disposable incomes were major determinants of
consumption in Keynesian models, but post-war theory has downplayed their
role in favor of forward-looking calculations of long-run disposable resources.          4



The issue is the length of the household horizons within which earnings, taxes
and transfers are pooled and over which this pool of current and future
resources is consumed at a fairly steady rate. The longer the horizon, the larger
the share of an increase in current income that will be saved rather than
consumed. No doubt households vary greatly in these horizons, from extremely
liquidity-constrained consumers who live hand-to-mouth and spend quickly
any cash receipts, to lords of dynasties who save all extra income for their
descendants. Liquidity constraints, e. g. , limitations on the intertemporal fun-
gibility of future wages and pensions, are sufficiently binding for many house-
holds that current disposable income remains an important determinant of
consumption.
    Current income is also a measure of transactions volume, and as such affects
particularly the demand for transactions money. In the four-asset model the
transactions effect will show up in a relatively high income-elasticity of de-
mand, direct or indirect, for base money.
    As the previous discussion makes clear, “human capital,” expected future
 wages, taxes, and transfers, is a determinant of current consumption and
 saving. Current disposable income may be an indicator of such wealth, but it is
 an incomplete and imperfect one. Good news about future disposable incomes
 within households’ horizons will reduce current saving, bad news will increase
 it. Effects on the composition of saving are more difficult to analyze. The time
 and age profiles of disposable income no doubt influence portfolios, especially if
 assets differ in liquidity. But these effects average out for the economy as a
 whole. A more important consideration arises from the uncertainties of both
 asset returns and earnings from human capital. Their covariances are very
 relevant to portfolio choice. Risk-averse savers will favor assets with returns
 negatively correlated with their own wages. Wage-earners who expect a highly


4
  Friedman (1957) and Modigliani and Brumberg (1952, 1954) are seminal. My own work on
consumption began with my doctoral thesis in 1947 and encompasses ten papers published over the
years and reprinted in Tobin (1975, Ch. 29-38).


28                              Economic Sciences 1981

cyclical macro-economic future will be wary of equities, whose returns and
values are likely to be low precisely when they are most likely to be unem-
ployed. Those who expect stable employment, real wages, and profits will be
skeptical of nominally denominated assets, bonds and money. Belief that
inflationary periods will be stagflationary because of counter-inflationary mon-
etary policies would lead households seeking hedges against unemployment
and lowered real wages to short-term dollar-denominated assets bearing mar-
ket interest rates (not included in my illustrative model) rather than to equities
or long-term bonds.
   The lesson of the previous discussion is that asset demand functions cannot
be expected to be stable in the face of significant variations in the economic
environment. The variances and covariances of returns on the several assets
reflect probability distributions of more fundamental shocks to the economy.
These are exogenous shocks in technology, tastes, and foreign economies as
well as in government policies.      Their impacts depend, moreover, on the re-
sponses to them by both private agents and government policy-makers. The
perceived joint probability distributions of those impacts, as reflected in the
estimated risks of various asset portfolios in combination with human capital,
are undoubtedly different in the 1980s from the 1960s. Asset demand functions
are different too. But the perceptions, conventions, and habits that underlie
asset demand functions do not change suddenly. It is sufficient for our immedi-
ate purpose that the functions are stable over the medium-term horizons of
economic fluctuations and stabilization policies.
    Taxes and transfers have been mentioned as elements in current and future
disposable incomes. Taxes on capital incomes also affect the after-tax returns to
asset holdings. The obvious point that taxation lowers expected yields is not the
whole story, because it changes the entire distribution of uncertain returns. If
the government shares symmetrically in losses and gains, its tax reduces the
risk as well as the average return on risky portfolios, while increasing the risk
and return to payers of other taxes, e.g. those on wages and consumption. The
effect of a given tax system on saving, portfolio choice, and asset values is a
 large and complex topic, beyond the scope of this lecture.

2.9. Macro-Economic Modeling Strategy: Stocks, Flows, and Specific Saving Functions
The innovation of the approach thus far described is the integration of saving
and portfolio decisions. Functions for accumulation of particular assets are
specified, and they add up to total wealth accumulation for the period. The
markets which determine asset prices and interest rates coordinate these de-
mand flows with the supply flows arising from real investment, the government
deficit, and the external current account. The markets handle simultaneously
flows arising from saving and accumulation and those arising from reshuffling
of portfolios, both by private agents on the demand side and by the monetary
authorities on the supply side. By the end of the period, simultaneously with
the determination of the asset prices for the period, these market participants
have the stocks of assets and of total wealth they desire at this time at the
prevailing prices.


                                         J. Tobin                                        29

   This is not the conventional strategy of short-run macro-economic models.
The conventional strategy is to model the determination of asset prices and
interest rates as a temporary stock equilibrium independent of flows of new
saving. This is done in the "LM" sector of the model, where wealth-owners,
constrained by the net worth inherited from their past savings but revalued at
current market prices of assets, choose the stocks of money and alternative assets
they wish to hold at these prices.        The stocks supplied to them are also
predetermined by history, except for instantaneous discrete modifications engi-
neered by the monetary authorities by open market operations at current asset
prices. Although households are simultaneously saving to accumulate wealth,
the IS-LM model contains no specific saving functions describing in what
forms they wish to accumulate it. Their absence means that the composition of
household portfolios at the end of the period is re-shaped solely by the issues of
new asset supplies to finance investment, government deficit, and current
account surplus. This composition may not be what households want, but the
correction is deferred until the asset-stock markets reopen at the beginning of
the next period. The unwelcome implication is that wealth-owners and savers,
in formulating their portfolio demands, ignore the fact that they are at the same
 time saving to augment their wealth. In contrast to the “LM” markets in
stocks, the simultaneous “IS” equations are grinding out flows of goods and
services.
   In my 1969 article describing a multi-asset framework for monetary analysis,
I perpetuated the implausible bifurcation to which I now object.           5
                                                                             I tried to
generalize the stock equilibrium of asset prices and quantities to a larger
collection of assets while winding up nonetheless with a single “LM” locus to
be juxtaposed with an “IS” locus. This condensation, I now recognize, is not in
general attainable. The major points of the 1969 paper did not depend on this
feature, but the blending of stock adjustments and saving flows advocated in
this lecture seems to me a preferable approach.
  The interpretation of the solution to a Keynesian short-run macroeconomic
system has always been ambiguous. This is especially true when the variables
are not explicitly dated by points or periods of time. Is the solution an
equilibrium in the sense of a position of rest? This can hardly be the case for a
model whose very solution implies changes in stocks of capital, wealth, govern-
ment debt, and other assets. Since the structural equations of the model depend
on those stocks, they will not replicate the solution when the stocks are moving.
Keynes himself recognized the problem but excused himself for ignoring the
dynamics of accumulation by defining the horizon of analysis as short enough
so that flows make insignificant difference to the size of stocks. The excuse
makes tolerable sense for the stocks of physical capital and total wealth, but
unbalanced government budgets, monetary operations, and external imbal-
ances can alter the corresponding asset stocks quite rapidly. A model whose
solution generates flows but completely ignores their consequences may be

5
However, my 1968 paper with William C. Brainard is not subject to this objection. Explicitly
modeling time in discrete periods, we followed in that paper the procedure here recommended.


30                                 Economic Sciences 1981


suspected of missing phenomena important even in a relatively short run, and
therefore giving incomplete or even misleading analyses of the effects of fiscal
and monetary policies.
   A specific complaint in this spirit was the allegation that the standard macro
model “ignored the government budget constraint”, i.e., the identity that
requires the deficit to be financed by issue of one or another government
liability. 6 This is true in the standard model unless it is dynamically extended
by tracking over time the growth in asset stocks and its effects on asset prices
and other variables. The formulation I presented above makes explicit the
government’s financing requirements and allows its issues of money and bonds
to affect financial markets right away.
   But neither the problem nor its solution is confined to government finance.
Another example concerns international capital movements and the determi-
nation of the exchange rate (Branson,            1976, 1977). The recently popular
aphorism “the exchange rate is an asset price”       is a truth, but a half- or quarter-
truth. It is a natural result of divorcing flows from stocks and of viewing asset
markets simply as reconciling wealth-constrained portfolio demands with exist-
ing stocks. The application of this model to international financial markets was,
to be sure, an advance over older analyses of payments imbalances and
exchange rates, which either neglected capital transactions altogether or as-
sumed that flows induced by interest rate differentials or other factors would
continue indefinitely regardless of their effects on composition of portfolios. But
it is more natural to recognize that exchange rates          are determined - or held at
parities by official interventions - in markets in which demands and supplies for
current and capital accounts are mingled (Tobin and de Macedo, 1980; Tobin,
 1981).
   Here, as in other financial markets, practical participants and observers are
 acutely conscious of the flows of new issues and new demands, while econo-
 mists focus on stocks. Each group is puzzled by the other’s emphasis. The
 chances are that both are right.

2.10. Macro-economic Modeling Strategy: Continuous or Discrete Time
The issues just discussed are related to the modeling of time. The equations
introduced above count time in discrete periods of equal finite length. Within
any period, each variable assumes one and only one value. In particular,
clearing of asset markets determines one set of asset prices per period. From
one period to the next asset stocks jump by finite amounts. Therefore the
demands and supplies for these jumps affect asset prices and other variables
within the period, the more so the greater the length of the period. They will
also, of course, influence the solutions in subsequent periods.
   The same modeling strategy can be used with continuous time. The specific
saving functions, as well as the total saving function, then tell the rate at which
savers want to be increasing their stocks of particular assets and of total wealth.


 An early example of the complaint is Christ (1966, 1968). The issue is discussed in Blinder and
6


Solow (1973, 1974) and by Tobin and Buiter (1976, 1980), and Tobin (1979).


                                        J. Tobin                                      31

They will reflect both the continuous execution of long run saving and portfolio
plans and the speeds of adjustment of stocks to deviations from these plans that
arise because of surprises, news, and altered circumstances or preferences.
   Either representation of time in economic dynamics is an unrealistic abstrac-
tion. We know by common observation that some variables, notably prices in
organized markets, move virtually continuously. Others remain fixed for
periods of varying length. Some decisions by economic agents are reconsidered
daily or hourly, while others are reviewed at intervals of a year or longer except
when extraordinary events compel revisions. It would be desirable in principle
to allow for differences among variables in frequencies of change and even to
make those frequencies endogenous. But at present models of such realism
seem beyond the power of our analytic tools. Moreover, many statistical data
are available only for arbitrary finite periods.
   Representation of economies as systems of simultaneous equations always
strains credibility. But it takes extraordinary suspension of disbelief to imagine
that the economy solves and re-solves such systems every micro-second. Even
with modern computers the task of the Walrasian Auctioneer, and of the
market participants who provide her with their demand and supply schedules,
would be impossible. Economic interdependence is the feature of economic life
that it is our business as professional economists to understand and explain.
Simultaneous equations systems are a convenient representation of interdepen-
dence, but it is more persuasive to think of the economic processes that solve
them as taking time rather than as working instantaneously.
   In any event, a model of short-run determination of macro-economic activity
must be regarded as referring to a slice of time, whether thick or paper-thin,
and as embedded in a dynamic process in which flows alter stocks, which in
turn condition subsequent flows.

2.11. Solution of the One-period Model
The four asset-market equations (11)-(14 ) are the core of the model, augment-
ed by the definition (16) of the deficit D and by the relationships (17)-(20)
between current and expected prices and the four one-period rates of return r         J
                                                                                       .
The solution and interpretation of this structure depend on which variables are
regarded as within-period endogenous and which as exogenous or predeter-
mined. If more than four variables are to be taken as endogenous, then one or
more equations must be added.
   Here I provide, both for illustration of method and for substantive interest,
three variants: (1) a “Keynesian ” version in which current real income Y is
endogenous but commodity price p is predetermined; (2) a “classical” version
in which price p is endogenous but Y is supply-determined by the capital stock
K-i and an exogenous labor force; (3 ) a “mixed” version with both p and Y
endogenous and connected by a within-period Phillips curve, a fifth equation.
In all variants, the asset price expectations figuring in (17)-(19) are assumed
to be less than unit-elastic with respect to the corresponding current prices, so
that the current prices are inversely related to the rates of return r      J
                                                                             . However,
in the “Keynesian” and “classical” variants, the commodity price expectation


32                                  Economic Sciences 1981

Ep+, is assumed to be proportional to the current price p. This assumption
fixes the expected inflation rate and thus r H. In a variant of the “mixed” case,
the expected inflation rate is taken to be the same as the current inflation rate,
Ep+,/p = p/p-~, so that r is determined by the short run Phillips curve.
                                  H



   The exogenous variables representing fiscal policy are government purchases
G and a constant or shift parameter in the tax-transfer function T (to be
interpreted, for simplicity, as not changing marginal tax rates on capital
incomes). The parameters of monetary policy are                yH, the share of the deficit
financed by printing base money, and z H and zF, open market “sales” of money
and foreign currency. In a regime of clean float of the exchange rate z            F
                                                                                     is zero;
in a regime with discretionary intervention, sale of foreign exchange, either for
money or for bonds, is a policy variable. In a regime of fixed exchange rates,
which will not be analyzed here, z F becomes an endogenous variable while e
and rF become exogenous.
    The Keynesian variant. With p and r H predetermined, the model can be solved
f o r ( rK , r B , r F , Y). Equations (17) - (19) implicitly substituted to eliminate
 (q K , qB, e) from the core equations, can then be used to obtain these three asset
prices.
    Differentiation of the core equations (11)-(14) gives a set of equations in the
differentials, with sign structures shown in (21 ). The fifth row, added fo r
reference, refers to the IS equation (1.5).




                                                                          Comparative statics
The sign structure of the Jacobian, except for the last column, follows from the
gross substitutability assumption for the A J functions, reinforced by the signs of
partial derivatives of the other terms in the core equations, specifically the
negative relations of asset prices to rates of return and the standard Marshall-
Lerner elasticity conditions for the trade balance. The final column embodies
the presumption that the marginal propensity to save from current income in
every asset is positive. Given this presumption, the only ambiguity, indicated
 by (?), is the possibility that an increase in Y, by raising current earnings of
capital R, raises q , investment, and the valuation of K- 1 enough to exceed the
                     K



 new demand for equity wealth it induces. The marginal propensity to invest
 may exceed the marginal propensity to save in equities.
   Assuming the sign structure shown , the determinant of the Jacobian is
 positive.7 Even if the questionable sign is reversed, it may be positive and will

7
  A dominant-diagonal matrix has positive diagonal elements, non-positive off-diagonal elements,
and positive column sums. Its determinant is positive. It remains positive if any column is replaced
by a non-negative vector with no negative elements and at least one positive element.


                                             J. Tobin                                   33

definitely be so if the sum of the first and last entries in the column is positive.
Given a positive Jacobian determinant, the structure of multipliers is shown in
Table 3.
   These are conventional macroeconomic results, qualitatively the same as
comparable conclusions of IS-LM apparatus. Note,              however, that - contrary to
 the classical Mundell (1963) conclusion that monetary policies work and fiscal
 policies do not in a regime of floating exchange         rates - expansionary policies of
 both kinds are here effective. In the Mundell model, fiscal expansion alone
 cannot increase aggregate demand because it appreciates the exchange rate
 and lowers the current account surplus; the foreign interest rate ties down
domestic rates so that the velocity of money cannot be raised. In the present
 model, fiscal expansion does not completely “crowd out” net exports. Ex-
 change appreciation lowers the demand for money both because the return on
 foreign assets is higher, given sticky exchange rate expectations, and because
 the value of foreign-currency wealth holdings is lower. This wealth effect
 requires, of course, that the holdings be positive. The asset substitution effects
 also imply that the floating rate does not insulate the economy from external
 demand shocks.
   The ambiguities of sign of the multipliers for rates of return reflect the variety
of possible substitution patterns in a multi-asset model. For example, with
bond financing of deficits, the equity return r       K
                                                        may actually decline if bonds
are a good substitute for money but a poor substitute for equities.
    The classical variant. Formally, the classical model has qualitatively the same
structure as (21), with the roles of p and Y interchanged. The multipliers for
both are those in Table 3. The positive price effects on excess asset demands
explicit in equations ( 11) - ( 14 ) may be reinforced by Pigou effects in the A
                                                                                          J



functions themselves. Without them the top entry in the last column of the
Jacobian, now the dp column, is zero. In any case the possible ambiguity of
 that sign is removed.

Table 3. Multipliers for Keynesian and Classical Cases
Endogenous Variables:




Expansionary fiscal policy
dG             Purchases (y” = 1, yH< 1)
-dT            Tax reduction, transfers
dG+dT          Balanced increase of budget
Expansionary monetary policy
-dyB         More monetary finance of deficit            -      -        -      +
- d zB       Open market purchases of bonds              -      -        -      +
- d zF       Open market purchases of
             foreign currency assets                     -      -        -      +
   B     F
d z-dz         Sterilized purchases of
               foreign currency assets                   2      +         -     ?
- d rH         Expectation of inflation                  -      -        -      +


34                              Economic Sciences 1981

    Monetary expansion is not neutral but lowers real interest rates and shifts
the composition of output from consumption to investment. Fiscal expansion
raises the price level, and if this does not induce enough saving and current
account deficit to finance the increased budget deficit, it raises r       K
                                                                             and crowds
out investment. Monetarist conclusions about fiscal policy require, as often
argued in the past, that interest-elasticities of money demand be zero (the first
three items in the fourth row of the Jacobian).
    The mixed model. Clearly an “aggregate supply” function, a positive within-
period relation between p and Y can be appended to the model without
changing its essential features. The effects of various policies and of other
exogenous variables will then be split between price and real income, but will
be in the same directions as shown in Table 3. These results depend on the
assumption that expected inflation, and thus r H, are independent of the current
price p.
    In the final column of (21) are given the signs of differentials for exogenous
variation of r H. In the middle two rows these reflect, in addition to the negative
effects of r H on A B a n d AF, its negative effects on q B and e. The resulting
multiplier signs appear in the final row of Table 3; not surprisingly, expectation
of inflation is expansionary and inflationary.
    Now suppose that r H is endogenous, equal to r!!, plus an expectation revision
related negatively to Y. This will add a fifth column to the Jacobian of (21),
namely the r H column with signs reversed as it becomes the fourth column of
 the Jacobian. The relation of r H to Y will add a row, [0 0 0 + +], and possibly
 reverse the sign of the Jacobian determinant and of the multipliers for p and Y.
 In an IS-LM diagram in r-Y space the equivalent reversal would arise if the
 LM locus, after subtracting from it the inflation generated at each level of Y by
 a Phillips curve, crossed IS from above to below rather than in the normal way.
    In models of this kind we are not free to dismiss such intuitively perverse
 solutions as unstable equilibria. There are no dynamics within the period or the
 slice of continuous time. The one-period model, simultaneous equations and
 all, is meant to say what actually happens. Dynamics and stability questions
 arise over a sequence of one-period solutions. In the example of the previous
 paragraph, the resolution probably lies elsewhere, e.g. in slowing down the
 translation of actual inflation into expected inflation.




3. POSSIBLE EXTENSIONS AND ELABORATIONS OF THE MODEL

3.1 Financial Intermediation, Loans, and Inside Money
As Table 1 shows, banks and other financial institutions mediate between
borrowers and lenders, making loans to businesses, governments, households,
and others, and incurring liabilities to households and other creditors. The
traditional business of commercial banks is to accept deposits and other obliga-
tions payable on demand or at specified times and to acquire assets of less
liquidity and longer maturity. Almost all their assets and liabilities, except
their owners’ equity, are promises to pay currency. Other intermediaries


                                        J. Tobin                                         35


likewise transform their assets into forms         better tailored - in convenience of
denomination, liquidity, maturity, and risk - to the preferences and circum-
stances of their creditors. Banks and other intermediaries, together with capital
and credit markets, thus create “inside” assets, claims of agents on each other
that wash out in aggregations of privately owned national wealth. In particu-
lar, banks create inside money, i. e.,    deposits that serve on a par with govern-
ment currency as generally acceptable transactions media or as close substi-
tutes therefor, “backed” on the other side of their ledgers not by base money or
government debt but by private loans and securities. In the United States the
equivalence of bank deposits to currency is sustained by government deposit
insurance, which in effect extends to deposits the government’s fiat.
    With banks and inside money, the nature of the demand for base (“outside”)
money is altered. In the United States, there are essentially two uses of base
money: currency in public circulation and bank reserves. Banks are legally
required to hold reserves, either in currency or on deposit in the central bank,
in fractions of checkable deposits and certain other liquid liabilities. They may
hold reserves in excess of requirements, or by borrowing from the central bank
they can make their “net free reserve”        positions negative. Thus the demand
function for base money consists of three parts: the nonbank public’s holdings
of currency; required bank reserves,         the required fraction of the public’s
demand for deposits; and net free reserves, a choice made by the banks in the
light of the Federal Reserve discount rate and the rates available on loans and
securities. The arguments in the three functions are the interest rates and other
variables relevant for household or bank portfolio decisions.
    The addition of bank deposits, of one or more varieties, to the asset list adds
 rows to matrices like Table 1. Whether it also adds to the list of endogenous
 interest rates depends on whether the nominal rate on deposits is, like the zero
 rate on currency, fixed by law or convention. Deposits with controlled interest
 rates are an example of an asset market not cleared by price. Banks are not on
 their deposit supply schedules. They would be ready to accept more deposits
 than the public wants at the controlled rate, but the smaller side of the market
 controls the quantity. Thus the banks’ disposable deposits, i. e. deposits net of
 required reserves, are available for allocation among free reserves, loans, and
 securities.
    Banks and other intermediaries can bid for deposits and other liabilities
 carrying market-determined assets. These in principle add to the list of endo-
 genous interest rates, although in practice certificates of time deposit may be
 nearly perfect substitutes for Treasury bills and other short open market paper.
 Similarly commercial loans, mortgages, and other assets characteristic of inter-
 mediaries may call for distinct rows and interest rates. Some loans may be
 rationed at administratively set interest rates, like the “prime”, with excess
 supply from borrowers chronic or frequent. A way to model a privately admin-
 istered non-competitive price is to imagine it to be reset for each period in
 relation to the excess supply observed in the preceding period. Then it is not a
 with-in period endogenous price, and the endogenous variable corresponding
 to its row equation is a quantity.


36                              Economic Sciences 1981


   The existence of monetary assets with fixed          nominal interest rates - base
money, deposits, and for short periods central         bank loans - gives leverage to
central bank monetary operations affecting their supplies. The reason is that
other asset prices, interest rates, commodity prices, and real incomes must
adjust to induce the public to absorb in their portfolios changes in these
supplies. For the same reason and for good or ill, non-policy shocks to the
supply of or demand for fixed-rate assets have leverage. In contrast, exogenous
increases in the net supply of an asset bearing a flexible market-determined rate
can in great part be accommodated by increases in the own-rate itself.
   In an n-asset model, if there are less than n endogenous interest rates the
asset-market equations can determine, as shown above, at least one other
variable, e.g. Y or p or some combination of them. If all assets had market-
determined rates, this degree of freedom would be lost. The trend of the
financial system is to enlarge the range of assets that have variable market-
determined rates, increasing the leverage of base money supplies and equiv-
alent shocks on market interest rates. This trend makes the Hicksian "LM"
curve more nearly vertical, rendering fiscal policies and other “IS” shocks less
consequential. Whether it contributes to stability or instability of output and
prices depends on the nature and strength of unpredictable and uncontrollable
shocks to the demands for and supplies of the small remaining core of fixed-rate
assets, and to the patterns of demands and supply among the variable-rate
assets, especially between nominally denominated securities and equities. It is
possible that q K and Y will be more rather than less variable in the    new regime.

3.2 Substitutabilily, Aggregation, and Estimation
In principle, the model should distinguish imperfectly substitutable asset cate-
gories and determine a separate rate of return for each. If two assets are perfect
substitutes, their interest rates move together and can be represented as one
variable. Then the two rows must be consolidated. In econometric practice this
is also expedient for close though imperfect substitutes. The strong collineari-
ties of time series of interest rates present difficult econometric problems. It is
often not clear whether observed co-variation is due to close substitutability or
to pervasive common exogenous shocks. History has frequently not performed
those experiments in variation of relative asset supplies that would test substi-
tutability hypotheses and allow estimations of cross elasticities. For this reason,
estimations and simulations of models or partial models have relied heavily on
priors about coefficients and their error distributions. In some cases these
Bayesian methods, though inferior to standard procedures in fitting sample
observations, have done better in out-of-sample forecasts (Smith and Brainard,
 1976).

3.3 International Asset Transactions
In Section 2 international capital movement was modeled in the most primitive
fashion, by specifying a single foreign-currency asset in which domestic resi-
dents could borrow or lend at an exogenous foreign currency interest rate.
Foreigners were assumed not to demand domestic assets. Because of these


                                            J. Tobin                                          37

simplifications, the supply-equals-demand equation for the foreign-currency
asset was also the balance-of-payments equation. One step toward realism is to
add foreign demands, with the same formats and        properties mutatis mutandum as
the domestic asset demand functions, to the equations for all local assets.
Foreign portfolio managers are presumably concerned with returns in their
own currencies. This amendment can be kept within the bounds of the “small
country” assumption by continuing to assume that foreign interest rates,
foreign incomes, and other relevant foreign variables are exogenous. The
balance-of-payments equation is the previous foreign-currency asset balance
equation, but with net demands now augmented by the sum of net foreign
demands for domestic assets. This amendment leaves intact, with only minor
qualifications, the conclusions of the simpler model.
   The second step, however, introduces considerable complexity and ambigu-
ity. This is to model two economies jointly and symmetrically, with residents of
each country demanding asset holdings in both currencies and with macro-
economic variables endogenous in both countries. The “gross substitutes”
assumption, the source of determinate qualitative results in Section 2, no longer
applies, because the same movement of the exchange rate has opposite mean-
ings to investors in the two countries. Own-currency preferences arise from the
facts that each country’s residents expect to buy consumer goods in its currency
and that the two countries’ products are imperfectly substitutable. Obviously,
succeeding steps, with n currencies and economies, would be still more diffi-
cult.8



4. DYNAMICS AND LONG-RUN STEADY STATES
Each within-period solution generates new values of predetermined variables
for the following period. These include of course stocks of portfolio assets and
capital, which follow obvious transitional equations. Likewise transitional
equations could pre-set other variables by the solutions in the immediately
preceding and other past periods. The inertia of commodity prices, and their
relation to economic activity, could be modeled in this way, as could be
adaptive expectations. Rational expectations dynamic solutions are also possi-
ble. However, dynamic solutions of a non-linear system, even one of such small
dimensionality as the one described in Section 2, cannot be obtained analytical-
ly but require simulations.
   With some special assumptions, the model has a steady state solution like
that of a monetary growth model (Tobin, 1955, 1965, 1968). The most impor-
tant assumptions, in addition to the familiar restrictions on production func-
tions, technological progress, and exogenous resources, concern asset prefer-
ences and saving. The existence of steady states requires that any constant set


 On the topic of this subsection, see Tobin and de Macedo (1980), which describes more fully the
8


simple model and takes the first and second steps of amendment. In a subsequent paper, Tobin
(1981), I have discussed the internationalization of portfolios and its relation to the theory of
exchange rates.


38                               Economic Sciences 1981


of rates of return all asset demands grow in proportion to the size of the
economy. The same homogeneity is required of government purchases and tax
revenues.
  Which of the various feasible steady states paths, all with the natural rate of
growth of the economy g, is the long run equilibrium depends on policy
parameters. These are two parameters setting budget purchases and tax rev-
enues as fractions s and τ of total output, and one parameter determining how
deficits are financed, yB or yH. Open market operations have no place or
purpose along an equilibrium path.
  A steady state solution determines the three rates of return (r            K
                                                                               , rB , rH ).
Capital accumulation occurs steadily at the natural rate of growth, and q              K
                                                                                         is
therefore equal to 1. Thus r is the net (after-tax) marginal product of capital,
                                K



inversely related to the capital-labor and capital-output ratios, and to output
and real wages per effective worker. The rate of return to base money, the
negative of the inflation rate, is endogenous in the long run though not in the
short-run one-period model. This is because rational expectations apply, as
they always have, to steady state solutions; expected and actual inflation must
be the same.
   I turn now to a brief discussion of the nature of a long-run equilibrium and of
the accompanying issues of analysis, interpretation, and policy. Here I refer to
a closed economy with three assets; the whole concept of steady long run
growth fails for open economies unless their several natural rates of growth
happen to be identical. For convenience, I use continuous time. Let b and h be
the stocks of bonds (consols) and high-powered (base) money at nominal
market value, each as a fraction of nominal income. These will be constants
over time in a steady state. The nominal interest rates on the two assets, also
constant over time, are (r B + π, 0) and the real rates (r B , rH ), where r H = −π.
The nominal price of bonds q B, again constant, is 1/(r B+ π). The nominal stock
of each asset, in dollars, is growing at rate g+   π, along with nominal income.
The following two equations describe the financing of the deficit:

                                                                       Steady state
                                                                       supplies of bonds
                                                                       and base money

Eliminating Yp from these equations and solving them for b and h gives:

                                                                         Solution of (22)



Note that the denominator could be written as g-r D where rD is the appropriate-
ly weighted average real interest rate on the public debt, monetary and non-
monetary. I confine myself to non-negative values of s-t, g-r       D
                                                                      , b, and h. Long-
run asset demand functions are aK(.), aB(.), and aH(.), each expressed as
fractions of real income Y and containing as arguments the three r          J
                                                                              and the tax
rate τ. As before, these add up to wealth demand a          w
                                                              . Let k be the capital-


                                                J. Tobin                                              39

output ratio, which with a normal constant-returns-to-scale production func-
tion in capital (endogenous) and effective labor (exogenous) will be inversely
related to rK.’ The three equations determining the steady state are:

                                                                          Steady state equations:
(24)    a K ( rK , rB , rH , τ) = k(r K ) = k                                   Capital, Equities


                                                                                                Bonds

                                                                                        Base Money

Their sum, a long-run “IS” relation, is


                                                                                               Wealth


Simple as system (24) - (26) looks, it leaves open a variety of possible relations
between endogenous variables and policy parameters. Particular interest, of
course, attaches to r K because of its link to capital intensity, labor productivity,
consumption per capita, and real wages. In the comparative statics of steady
states, “expansionary” policies - high s, low τ, and high yH-may be associated
with lower r H (more inflation) and with lower r K and higher capital intensity k.
Or the steady state association ofpolicies and results may be quite the opposite.
    The formal reason for these ambiguities is that the “gross substitutes”
property, though assumed for the a J functions, does not guarantee a dominant-
diagonal Jacobian matrix. For example, in the H equation of (24) an increase of
r H raises the demand for base money on the left hand side. But it also raises the
supply, by diminishing the denominator on the            right hand side - and perhaps
 by more than the demand. For a similar reason the diagonal entry in the
Jacobian might be negative in the B row.
    The major possibilities can be illustrated graphically, though with some
loss of generality, by aggregating b+h and plotting their sum d against                  r D,
the weighted average defined above. This is done in Figures 1 and 2, where the
rectangular hyperbola d s is the “supply” of d, equal to (s--t)/g-rD). Now
imagine that r B and rH affect aK only as they affect r D; this special assumption is
necessary for the graphical illustration. For any r      D
                                                           , the K equation can then be
solved for r , which will be positively associated with r H. The corresponding k
               K



can be added to ds to obtain w. Now r k , together with the r B and rH that make up
r D, determines a B and a” in the second and third equations. Their sum is the
demand for public debt, a D. I n an equilibrium a D and ds must be equal, as at a
point labelled E. In the bottom panels of the figures r       K
                                                                is plotted against r D. The
r associated with k equal to w-d s is rKs , and the r associated with w-a D is r,“.
  K                                                       K




9
 Pre-tax. I do not discuss here the taxation of capital income, but it could be analyzed by putting
after-tax rates of return in the a’ functions and taking account also of the effects of taxation on risk,
mentioned above.


40                               Economic Sciences 1981


They are equal in the equilibrium E. Expansionary policies raise           r:, but what
that does to equilibrium r k differs in the two cases.
   Figure 1 is the analog of what I called in the short-run analysis the standard
case, associated with a dominant-diagonal Jacobian. The demand effects of
own-rates exceed the supply effects. Clearly an increase in s-t, raising the d           s

hyperbola as indicated by the arrows raises r D and rK . Greater deficit spending
“crowds out” capital, and part of the mechanism i s lowering the inflation rate. It
is quite possible that an increase in    yH , greater monetization of deficits, works
in the same directions; assuming r
                                        H.is less than r D, one of its effects too is to
shift ds to the left.
   The stability of the equilibrium in Figure 1 is another question, which I must
leave open. Skepticism of its stability arises not only from intuition but from the
same model’s short-run conclusion that the same policies are inflationary and
 may increase capital investment. Resolution of the apparent paradox would
 presumably require a rational expectations explanation of the price level, with
 economic agents foreseeing the steady state and internalizing the transversality
 conditions.




Figure 1. Steady State Equilibrium of Government Debt and Capital And Their Rates of Return
(Standard Case)


                                          J. Tobin                                        41

   The alternative, Figure 2, shows a D flatter than d s. Here the same “expan-
sionary” policies raise the inflation rate an d “crowd in” capital, which replaces
less attractive public debt. Here the demands for money and bonds are less
responsive to rates of return; perhaps paradoxically, Figure 2 pictures the more
monetarist world. Still another possibility, shown by the dashed a        D
                                                                            curve in
Figure 2, is that there is no steady state equilibrium at all. The deficit      S -T is so
high that there is no r at which the supply of debt will be held in competition
                          D



with capital. This is a recipe for hyper-inflation.
     In the United States total federal debt is about 24% of GNP, 6% base money
plus 18% non-monetary debt, implying             yH = l/4 and yB = 3/4. With inflation
of 10% per year and nominal interest rates on debt instruments around 14%,
r D is 0.5%. Assuming a natural growth rate of 2.5%, g-r           D
                                                                     is 2%. Implicit in
these numbers is a steady-state budget deficit (exclusive of debt interest) of
0.48% of GNP. Thus d s would double to 48% by a 100 basis point rise in r                D
                                                                                           .
Since it seems unlikely that demand a         D
                                                would rise as much, Figure 2 applies.




Figure 2. Steady State Equilibrium of Government Debt and Capital And Their Rates of Return
(Non-standard Case).


42                               Economic Sciences 1981


   In any case, financial policies are not neutral in the long run any more than
in the short run. The variation of r K and capital intensity across steady states
violates “super-neutrality,” i.e., invariance of real outcomes to the rate of
inflation. Since inflation is the inverse of a real interest rate, this is scarcely
surprising. In the background is the competition between capital and public
debt for allocation of limited wealth. Such competition might not occur for
consumers with infinite horizons, who would accumulate capital and every
other asset until each of their yields equals a constant time preference rate. In
contrast, savers with horizons of lifetimes or other finite periods will have finite
demands for wealth and for every asset at any given rates of return (Tobin and
Buiter, 1980, pp. 98-103).
   Paul Samuelson showed in his 1958 parable of overlapping generations that
unassisted competitive markets do not necessarily attain socially optimal or
even Pareto-optimal equilibria when mortal households cannot trade with each
other across time. The insight reinforces Keynes’s observation of the difficulties
of market coordination without futures markets and helps to explain their
absence.
   Macro-economic market failures make it possible that government financial
interventions can improve welfare, but they by no means guarantee that actual
policies will do so. The focus of my lecture has been on the ways fiscal and
monetary policies alter macro-economic outcomes in the short and the long
 run. I have not considered the optimal design of policies, or the optimal rules of
government intervention in response to shocks that disturb the economy’s path.
Those are important items of unfinished business on the agenda of monetary
 theory and macro-economics.




                                                                  National income identity

                                                                  National income identity

                                                                      Investment function




                                                                       Government deficit

                                                                       Government deficit



                                                                     Supply of base money

                                                                          Supply of bonds

                                                                Supply of foreign currency
                                                                     assets by government


J. Tobin                                43

                    Balance of payments



                         Supply of
                         foreign currency
                         assets to public
                      Demand = supply
                      equations:

                      Equities market

                      Bond market

                      Foreign-currency
                      assets market

                      Base money
                      market


                            Total wealth



                           Deficit defined

                  Equities, price and rate
                  of return

           Bonds, price and rate of return

            Foreign currency assets, price
            and rate of return

               Base money, rate of return




                                        tics



                              Steady state
                              supplies of bond
                              and base money


                          Solution of (22)


                  Steady state equations:
                  Capital, Equities


44                                   Economic Sciences 1981


                                                                                              Bonds

                                                                                        Base Money

                                                                                             Wealth




REFERENCES
Abel, A. (1980), “Empirical Investment Equations: An Integrative Framework,” in K. Brunner
  and A. Meltzer, editors, On the State of Macro-Economics , Carnegie-Rochester Series on Public
  Policy 12, Amsterdam, North-Holland, 39-91.
Arrow, K. (1973), “General Economic Equilibrium: Purpose, Analytic Techniques, Collective
  Choice,” Les Prix Nobel en 1972 , Stockholm and American Economic Review 64, June 1974, 253-272.
Backus, D., W. C. Brainard, G. Smith, and J. Tobin (1980), “A Model of U.S. Financial and
  Nonfinancial Economic Behavior," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking , May, 12, 259-293.
Backus, D. and D. Purvis (1980), “An Integrated Model of Household Flow-of-Funds Alloca-
  tions,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, May, 12, 480-421.
Baumol, W. J, (1952), “The Transactions Demand for Cash: An Inventory Theoretic Approach,”
   Quarterly Journal of Economics , November, 56, 545-56.
Blinder, A. and R. M. Solow (1973), “Does Fiscal Policy Matter?“, Journal of Public Economics ,
  November, 2, 318-37.
- - (1974), “Analytical Foundations of Fiscal Policy, ” in Brookings Institution, The Economics of
  Public Finance , Washington.
Brainard, W. C. and G. Smith (1979), “The Systematic Specification of a Full Prior Covariance
   Matrix,” Mimeo.
Branson, W. H. (1976), “The Dual Roles of the Government Budget and the Balance of Payments
   in the Movement from Short-Run to Long-Run Equilibrium,” Quarterly Journal of Economics ,
   August, 90, 345-67.
- - (1977), “A ‘Keynesian’ Approach to Worldwide Inflation.” In Worldwide Inflation: Theory and
   Recent Experience, edited by Lawrence B. Krause and Walter S. Salant, 63-92. Washington: The
   Brookings Institution.
Christ, C. (1966), “A Short-Run Aggregate-Demand Model of the Interdependence and Effects of
   Monetary and Fiscal Policies with Keynesian and Classical Interest Elasticities,” American
   Economic Review, May, 57, 434-43.
- (1968), “A Simple Macroeconomic Model with a Government Budget Restraint,” Journal o f
   Political Economy , January/February, 76, 53-67.
Ciccolo, J. (1975), Four Essays on Monetary Theory , Ph.D. disseration, Yale University, unpublished.
Ciccolo, J. and G. Fromm (1979), “ ‘q’ and The Theory of Investment,” Journal of Finance , May, 34,
   535-47.
Friedman, B. (1977), “Financial Flow Variables and the Short-Run Determination of Long-Term
   Interest Rates,” Journal of Political Economy, August, 85, 661-89.
- (1980), “The Determination of Long-Term Interest Rates: Implications for Fiscal and Monetary
   Policies,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, May, 12, 331-352.
Friedman, M. (1957), A Theory of the Consumption Function, National Bureau of Economic Research,
   Princeton, Princeton University Press.
van Furstenberg, G. M. (1977), “Corporate Investment: Does Market Valuation Matter in the
   Aggregate?“, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity , No. 2, 347-97.
Hahn, F. H. (1965), “On Some Problems of Proving the Existence of Equilibrium in Monetary
   Economy,” in Hahn and F. B. R. Brechling, editors, The Theory of Interest Rates , London,
   Macmillan, 126-35.
- (1971), “Equilibrium with Transactions Costs,” Econometrica , 39, May, 417-39.
- (1973 a), “On the Foundations of Monetary Theory, ” in M. Parkin and A. R. Nobay editors,
   Essays in Modern Economics , New York, Harper and Row, 230-42.


                                               J. Tobin                                               45


- (1973 b), “On Transactions Costs, Inessential Sequence Economies and Money,” Review o f
  Economic Studies, October, 40, 449-61.
Hicks, J. R. (1935), “A Suggestion for Simplifying the Theory of Money,” Economica , N. S. 2, Feb.,
   l-19.
- (1937), “Mr. Keynes and the ‘Classics’: A Suggested Interpretation,” Econometrica , April, 5,
   147-159.
Kareken, J, and N. Wallace, editors, (1980), Models of Monetary Economics, Federal Reserve Bank of
   Minneapolis.
Keynes, J. M. (1936), The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money, New York, Harcourt
   Brace.
Lucas, R. E., Jr. (1976), “Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique,” Journal of Monetary Econom -
   ics, Supplement , Vol. 1, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, The Phillips Curve
  and Labour Markets.
Malkiel, B. G., G. M. van Furstenberg, and H. S. Watson (1979), “Industry ‘q’s,’ Corporate
   Investment, and Wage and Price Changes,” Journal of Finance, 34, May, 549-61.
Markowitz, H. (1952), “Portfolio Selection,” Journal of Finance, March, 7, 77-91.
- (1959), Portfolio Selection: Efficient Diversification of Investments , Cowles Foundation Monograph 16,
   New York, Wiley.
Miller M. H. and D. Orr (1966), “A Model of the Demand for Money by Firms,” Quarterly Journal
   of Economics, 80, August, 413-435.
Modigliani, F. and R. Brumberg (1952), “Utility Analysis and Aggregate Consumption Functions:
   An Attempt at Integration,” Mimeo, published in F. Modigliani, Collected Papers, Vol. 2,
   Cambridge, M.I.T. Press, 1979, 128-199.
- - (1954), ‘Utility Analysis and the Consumption Function: An Interpretation of Cross-Section
   Data,” in K. Kurihara, editor, Post-Keynesian         Economics, New Brunswick, Rutgers University
   Press, 388-436.
Mundell, R. A. (1963), “Capital Mobility and Stabilization Policy under Fixed and Flexible
   Exchange Rates,” Canadian Journal of Economics and Political Science , November, 29, 475-85.
Samuelson, P. A. (1958), “An Exact Consumption-Loan Model of Interest with or without the
   Social Contrivance of Money,” Journal of Political Economy, December, 66, 467-82.
Smith, G. and W. C. Brainard (1974), “Disequilibrium Models for Financial Institutions,” Cowles
   Foundation Discussion Paper 535, New Haven, Mimeo.
- - (1976), “The Value of A Priori Information in Estimating a Financial Model,” Journal o f
   Finance, December, 31, 1299-1322.
Summers, L. (1981), “Taxation and Corporate Investment: A q-Theory Approach,” Brookings
   Papers on Economic Activity, No. 1, 67- 140.
Tobin, J. (1947), A Theoretical and Statistical Analysis of Consumer Saving, Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard
   University, unpublished.
- (1955), “A Dynamic Aggregate Model,” Journal of Political Economy , April, 63, 103- 115.
- (1956), “The Interest Elasticity of Transactions Demand for Cash,” Review of Economics and
   Statistics , August, 38, 241-47.
- (1958), “Liquidity Preference as Behavior Towards Risk,” Review of Economic Studies, February,
   25,65-86.
- (1965), “Money and Economic Growth,” Econometrica , October, 33, 67 l-684.
- (1968), “Notes on Optimal Monetary Growth,” Journal of Political Economy, August, 76,833-859.
- (1969), “A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory,” Journal of Money, Credit and
   Banking, 1, February, 15-29.
- (1975), Essays in Economics, Vol. 2, Amsterdam, North-Holland.
- (1978), “Monetary Policies and the Economy - The Transmission Mechanism,” Southern
   Economic Journal, 44, January, 421-43 1.
- (1979), “Deficit Spending and Crowding Out in Shorter and Longer Runs,” in H. I. Greenfield
   et al, editors, Theory for Economic Efficiency: Essays in Honor of Abba P. Lemer, Cambridge, M. I. T.
   Press, 217-236.


46                                    Economic Sciences 1981


- (1981), “The State of Exchange Rate Theory: Some Skeptical Observations,” in R. N. Cooper et
   al, editors, The International Monetary System under Flexible Exchange Rates: Global, Regional, and
   National. Essays in Honor of Robert Triffin. Cambridge, Ballinger.
- and W. C. Brainard (1968), “Pitfalls in Financial Model Building, ” American Economic Review, 58,
   May, 99- 122.
- and W. C. Brainard (1977), “Asset Markets and the Cost of Capital.” In Economic Progress:
   Private Values and Public Policy (Essays in Honor of William Fellner), edited by Richard Nelson
   and Bela Balassa, 235-262. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
- and W. Buiter (1976), “Long-Run Effects of Fiscal and Monetary Policy on Aggregate De-
   mand,” in J. L. Stein, editor, Monetarism, Amsterdam, North-Holland, 273-309.
- and W. Buiter (1980), “Fiscal and Monetary Policies, Capital Formation, and Economic
   Activity, ” in G. M. van Furstenberg, editor, The Government and Capital Formation, Cambridge,
   Ballinger, 73- 151.
- and J. B. de Macedo (1980), “The Short-Run Macroeconomics of Floating Exchange Rates: an
   Exposition, ” in J. S. Chipman and C. P. Kindleberger, editors, Flexible Exchange Rates and the
   Balance of Payments, Amsterdam, North-Holland, 5-28.


                                              J. Tobin                                           47


SYMBOLS
               Y       real net national product
               S       real private saving
               I       real net capital investment (including adjustment costs)
              D        real government deficit
              C        real private consumption
              G        real government purchases of goods and services
              T        tax revenues net of transfers, real
            CAS        real current account surplus
              K        capital stock, real
              B        stock of bonds, nominal, measured by coupon payments per period
              H        stock of high-powered (base) money, nominal
              F        stock of foreign currency assets, privately owned, nominal in foreign curren-
                       cy
              GF       stock of foreign currency assets publicly owned, nominal in foreign currency
               W       private net worth, real
               P       commodity price
            p GF       foreign commodity price, in foreign currency
               e       exchange rate: domestic currency price of a unit of foreign currency
              qk       ratio of market price of equities to standard replacement cost of a unit of
                       capital
              qB       nominal price of a bond paying $1 per period in perpetuity
              γB       fraction of deficit financed by selling bonds
              γH       fraction of deficit financed by issuing base money
               z
                   J
                        (J = B, F, H) additional government sale or issue of asset J, nominal
               QF      interest rate on foreign-currency assets, in foreign currency
               r
                   J
                        (J = B, F, H) real one period expected return on asset J
               X       trade surplus
                       natural growth rate
                :      capital depreciation rate
               AJ       (J = K, B, F, H) demand for asset J at end of period, real
                R      earnings per unit of capital, real
           x or xt     value of a variable x in period t
    xx, or xt-1        value of x in period t- 1
  Ex+ I or Ex,+ I      expected value of x in period t + 1
       ∆x or ∆x,       xt-X1-l
                   S   steady state   G/Y
                z      steady state   T/Y
                k      steady state   K/Y        a k steady state demand for k
                b      steady state   qBB/pY a b steady state demand for b
                h      steady state   H/pY       a h steady state demand for h
                w      steady state   W/Y        a w steady state demand for w
               rD      average real   interest rate on government debt, yBrB+yHrH
                d      b+h
                       inflation rate
