BUT WHO WILL GUARD THE GUARDIANS?

Prize Lecture, December 8, 2007
by
Leonid Hurwicz1
University of Minnesota, Department of Economics, 1008 Heller Hall, 271
19th Avenue S., Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.




1. INTRODUCTION
In posing the famous question,2 the Roman author, Juvenal, was suggesting
that wives cannot be trusted, and keeping them under guard is not a solution
− because the guards cannot be trusted either.
  Half a millennium or so earlier, Plato3 in The Republic expressed a more
optimistic view regarding the guardians or rulers of the city-state, namely that
one should be able to trust them to behave properly; that it was absurd to
suppose that they should require oversight.
  Socrates, referring to an earlier statement4 that “drunkenness is most un-
befitting guardians,” says: “From intoxication we said that they must abstain.
For a guardian is surely the last person in the world to whom it is allowable to
get drunk and not know where on earth he is.” To which Glaucon, Socrates’
interlocutor, replies: “Yes, it would be absurd5 that a guardian should need
a guard.” Instead of Juvenal’s later pessimism, indeed cynicism, Plato −
through Glaucon − expresses the optimistic view that one should be able
to trust the city’s guardians and rulers to behave properly; that they should
require oversight is an absurdity.

1.2
A casual perusal of daily newspapers indicates that there is nothing absurd
about the present day “guardians”− by which I mean leaders and officials of
1
   Thanks are due to Eric Maskin, Roger Myerson and members of my family, especially Michael
and Maxim Hurwicz, for their editorial suggestions. Remaining imperfections are mine. L. H.
2
   “Sed quis custodiet ipsos custodes?” Liber secundus, Satura VI, lines 347–8, p. 325, in D.
Junii Juvenalis Saturarum Libri V; mit Erklärenden Anmerkungen von Ludwig Friedlaender, Erster
Band, Leipzig, Verlag von S. Hirzel, 1895.
3
   Book III, XII, 403E, p. 264 (Greek) and p. 265 (English), in volume I, of Plato, The Republic
(0/,)4%)!), with an English translation by Paul Shorey, London, William Heinemann Ltd.;
New York: G. P. Putnam’s sons, MCMXXX.
4
   Ibid., pp. 246–7, no. 398E.
5
   In B. Jowett’s 1908 translation (Oxford, Clarendon Press, 3rd ed., reprinted 1928) “ridiculous”
replaces “absurd”. [Jowett’s rendering seems better because the etymology of the Greek word
used by Glaucon appears to be “laughable”−as is that of “ridiculous”.] But the recent translation
by A. D. Lindsay (Everyman, J. M. Dent, London; Charles E. Tuttle, Vermont, 1992, 1995) again
uses “absurd”.


280


political, economic, and social entities − needing, and indeed getting, a great
deal of oversight.6 The question is rather as to the extent oversight is, or
even can be, effective. Publicly expressed attitudes toward government, law
enforcement, union and corporate leadership are often more reminiscent of
Juvenal than Plato.

1.3
Parallel questions in economics have been analyzed using the idea of the
institution,7 in the sense of institutional arrangements or “rules of the game”
(rather than organizations, which are referred to as “artificial players”). This
economic analysis focuses on implementation (in particular, the rule of law
and its enforcement) as essential to the functioning of institutions.8
   Some of the most basic contemporary policy issues involve choice of insti-
tutions: Markets versus central planning, the scope and structure of social
insurance (unemployment, old age, health), “property rights” as solutions to
problems posed by externalities, world free trade, and the degree of econom-
ic integration of independent nations are obvious examples. The question
is whether the role of institutions can be captured by appropriate analytical
tools and incorporated into economic models. Metaphorically, whether insti-
tutions can be introduced into models as variables, even as unknowns, rather
than as fixed parts of the landscape (as is, for instance, perfect competition
in so many mainstream models). If we can construct such models, then we
can also consider incorporating implementation devices, with their limita-
tions and potentials.
   Much economic analysis is based on the perfectly competitive model,
which implies strong assumptions concerning two things: 1) the information
available to “agents” (individuals, firms, etc.) engaging in economic activ-
ity, and 2) the existence of implementation mechanisms such as enforcing
contracts and preventing collusion. Similarly, conclusions concerning the
effects of alternative forms of taxation, subsidies, or social insurance depend
in an essential way on implementation mechanisms supplying information
concerning obligations and entitlements, entities facilitating financial flows,
as well as enforcement of payments and disclosure of relevant informa-
tion. Until recently much more attention has been paid to the information

6
    Without explicitly mentioning the classical precedents, the Wall Street Journal of May 8, 1998
(pp. B1–B2) carries a story under the headline “Guardians May Need Someone to Watch Over
Them.” It speaks of court-appointed guardians and conservators who dishonestly dissipate their
wards’ assets and of the difﬁculties the courts have in exercising their oversight responsibilities.
In turn watchdog groups and legislative task forces try to improve the performance of the judicial
branch.
7
    In the sense of institutional arrangements(“rules of the game”) rather than entities such as
various types of organizations (“artiﬁcial players”).
8
    E. Ostrom, Walker and Gardner point out that emphasis on the importance of enforcement
is found in Hobbes, although they disagree with his stress on the need for an external enforcing
authority (the sovereign). They stress intra-group mutual enforcement. Schotter (1981, p. 11)
makes self-policing or external policing authority an integral part of the deﬁnition of a social
institution. He recognizes the possibility of intra-group enforcement through a supergame
model (p. 165, note 8).


                                                                                               281


requirements (and uncertainty when precise information is not available)
than to implementation. Yet if implementation is impossible or prohibitively
costly, even the most attractive mechanism remains a utopia.
  In the 1960’s and ’70’s, researchers studying informationally decentralized
and game-modeled mechanisms addressed those issues.


2. MESSAGE EXCHANGE (NON-GAME-THEORETIC) PROCESSES
We now proceed to the process of message exchange, an analysis that does
not involve game theory.
   A process is defined as informationally decentralized when each economic
unit (such as a consumer or firm) initially only has information about itself
(its preferences, technology, or resources) but not about other units. The
process then requires an exchange of signals (called messages) to attain ob-
jectives such as efficiency of the system as a whole. (The goal, for instance,
could be Pareto optimality or efficiency, in which no one can be made better
off without someone else being made worse off.) By quantifying the informa-
tion in the signals -- for example how many units or what the dimension is of
the spaces used -- in the context of rigorously formulated models, it has been
shown that it may be impossible in certain cases to guarantee finite dimen-
sional message space. An example is economies with detrimental externali-
ties such as pollution or infinite time horizon. This impossibility applies to all
informationally decentralized mechanisms, even if one assumes that all par-
ticipants are truthful and abide by prescribed rules: There are cases where
no rules can guarantee the attainment of the desired objectives (for instance,
efficiency). Thus enforceability of rules is not always an issue.


3.
But what if we don’t assume that participants are always truthful? Samuelson
raised this question in the mid-’50’s in classic articles on public goods, and
in particular on the so-called Lindahl solution, in which individuals pay for a
public good according to their marginal willingness to pay: that is, how eager
they are to pay to achieve a supply of some specified public good. Samuelson
pointed out that the Lindahl mechanism did not take care of the free rider
problem, in which individuals gain an advantage by understating their inter-
est in public goods. Samuelson went on to conjecture that the same problem
would arise in any decentralized mechanism allocating public goods. Could
these two points be formalized and rigorously justified?


4. GAME-THEORETIC FRAMEWORK
If we use a game theoretic framework, how does this go?
   A natural framework for such analysis turned out to be Nash’s theory of
non-cooperative games and the concept of Nash equilibrium, in which no
player gains by changing only his or her own strategy unilaterally. Viewing

282


the economic process as a non-cooperative game in which the strategy of
each participant is a statement (not necessarily truthful) about his/her pref-
erences and the “payoff” is the utility of the outcome for that participant
(defined in Samuelson’s analysis by the Lindahl formula), Samuelson’s first
point can be formalized as the proposition that truthful revelation of pref-
erences is not a Nash equilibrium in the Lindahl game. That is, if all other
players have told the truth, and it is now your turn, you will in general gain by
misrepresenting your preferences. So, Samuelson’s first point turned out to
be correct: Truth is not a Nash equilibrium.


5.
However, Samuelson’s second point, that illegal behavior would be advanta-
geous in any decentralized system, allows consideration of different criteria
for judging system performance (for example, Pareto optimality or degree
of income inequality) and different kinds of decentralized mechanisms,
including one proposed by Groves and Ledyard (1977), which admitted as
strategies any signals (“messages”), not necessarily just revelations of one’s
own preferences.
   In fact, in the simplest version of the Groves-Ledyard mechanism, a partici-
pant is just told “Give me any number within a certain set of limits.” The par-
ticipant is not answering any question, and not necessarily revealing anything.
   Groves and Ledyard constructed a non-revelation (which should really be
understood as “not necessarily revelation”) model yielding Pareto-optimal
(though not Lindahl) Nash equilibrium outcomes in economies with three
or more participants. Later (Hurwicz 1979a) it was shown that even Lindahl
outcomes could be obtained as Nash equilibria of suitably designed non-reve-
lation games. If one regards this broader (not necessarily revelation) class of
mechanisms as decentralized --, and that’s a very important “if” -- Samuelson’s
second (impossibility) point cannot be accepted. Hence optimism replaces
pessimism. However, is there still a problem of enforcement?


6. ARE NASH EQUILIBRIA SELF-ENFORCING?
I believe the answer is, “Yes, there is a problem of enforcement”.
   Now we come to a very important and closely related issue. We are ask-
ing whether a given Nash equilibrium in a specified game is enforceable or
not. And one occasionally hears the claim that there can be no enforcement
problem with Nash equilibria because allegedly Nash equilibria are self-en-
forcing. I want to stress that I am denying this claim, but I want to give the
other side an opportunity to give their arguments. Their argument is that,
by definition, in a Nash equilibrium, no player can profit by a unilateral
departure from his or her equilibrium strategy. Furthermore, collusions are
infeasible in a non-cooperative game. Hence, the argument goes, there is no
need (or possibility, really) for enforcement.


                                                                             283


   But this argument assumes first that players will not or cannot cheat, that
they will consider only strategies prescribed by the mechanism governing the
system, what we call the “legal” strategies. In addition, it assumes machinery
(involving not only enforcement but also information processing and finan-
cial procedures) to ensure that specified outcomes will in fact be produced.
   These assumptions are accepted as given in the usual argument about
Nash equilibria. However, if you question these assumptions, then there is no
doubt that enforcement is a valid question to pose, even in Nash equilibria.


7. FORMALIZING RULES OF A GAME AS GAME-FORMS (MECHANISMS)
We now proceed to another important issue, namely, formalizing rules of a
game as “game forms” or synonymously “mechanisms”.
   A game is defined by the players’ strategy domains and payoff functions.
A mechanism or game form (rules of the economic game), shares with the
game the strategy domains, but differs in that it involves an outcome function.
Let me stress that I am distinguishing between a game form and a game: They
have strategy domains in common. In the case of a game what is added to
that are payoff functions. In contrast, a mechanism involves only physical out-
comes. Each may be viewed as a pair where the first component of each pair is
a strategy domain associated with various individuals. The second component
of a game form is what we call an outcome function associating a physical outcome
with a given point in the domain. So, for example, the outcome of an election
is the player who got elected. On the other hand, the “payoff” component in
the concept of a game is the listing of how players feel about the outcome as
measured by the numerical value of the utility using the strategy chosen. For
example, Mr. Bush is the outcome of the 2000 year election. The “payoff” is
how players feel about the outcome. The “outcome” is the physical descrip-
tion of what happened, depending on what kinds of strategies were chosen.
And it may happen that strategies that were chosen by some agents were not
legal strategies, because somebody decided to risk being illegal.
   We assume that each player has a utility function, associating a real numer-
ical value of the outcome for that participant with any conceivable outcome
of the game.
   In a model devoted to the analysis of institutional arrangements it is essen-
tial to separate that which belongs to the data (“environment”) -- thus prefer-
ences, endowments, and technologies -- from that which is subject to human
manipulation, in our model the strategy domains and the outcome functions.
It is natural to refer to a “strategy-outcome pair”, that is, the pair consisting
of strategy choices and the outcome corresponding to them. It is natural to
refer to these pairs as the rules of a game since the strategy domain defines the
legal moves and the outcome function defines their consequences.
   On the other hand, in game theory jargon the “strategies-outcomes” pair
is called a game-form (hyphenated); in economics, it’s called a mechanism. The
mechanism is not affected by changes in preferences but the payoff functions
are. The game-form can be changed directly by legislation or other human

284


actions; the payoff functions only indirectly through changes in the game-
form. The outcome is an objective fact, but the payoff combines that fact with
the participant’s preferences for the outcome. The preferences may be the
positive and negative.


8.
A need for enforcement implies the possibility of behavior that violates the
rules of the game. The point is that if there were no possibility of violation,
then you wouldn’t need enforcement. We refer to such strategies as illegal, as
distinct from legal, of course.
   To represent this, we introduce the set of all feasible actions, legal and il-
legal, and we call that the true strategy domain. Thus the set of true strategies
consists of two feasible and disjoint subsets, that of legal strategies and that of
illegal strategies. That means that this person we have in mind is turning over
in his or her mind “Should I use a legal strategy, or maybe I would be better
off to risk the illegal?” And that is what we call true strategy (as distinct from
only talking about legal strategies). Some very ethical or law-abiding person
might never consider anything illegal. But we are talking about people who
might risk it. And if that’s the case, and they may have chosen an illegal strat-
egy, then you are interested to know what the true outcome function is. The
decision was illegal, but it does produce consequences. We consider partici-
pants to be playing the “true game” whose game-form may contain both legal
and illegal strategies, although it is the legal game we want them to play.


9. SUCCESSFUL ENFORCEMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
Now, what is successful enforcement? You might say, “Doesn’t everybody
know what successful enforcement means?” But, for example, whether or not
Samuelson’s second conjecture is true may determine how success is mea-
sured. So it’s important to specify this.
  This framework makes it possible to formalize the notions of enforcement
and implementation.

9.1 SUCCESSFUL ENFORCEMENT
To say that the legal game rules are being successfully enforced means that the
outcomes of the true game ensure that illegal strategies are less attractive
than legal strategies. A strong formulation of successful enforcement might
require that, for every player, every illegal strategy is dominated by (that is, is
less attractive than) some legal strategy. A “weak” domination would require
only that a player at least be no worse off by staying within the law.
   In fact, however, if everyone else is acting illegally, a normally law-abiding
player may not find it advantageous to remain law-abiding. It seems, there-
fore, more reasonable to adopt a somewhat weaker concept of successful
enforcement.
   Now we study further the implementation idea.

                                                                               285


9.2 IMPLEMENTATION
Consider what is involved in making effective an institution such as Social
Security. The desired mechanism − say as defined by legislation − specifies
the class of persons receiving payments, say in relation to previous income
and other variables. It may also specify the sources of funding. There is a
need to formulate a modus operandi, verify whether specific applicants are
entitled to receive payments and, if so, at what level, and how to collect the
required funds. Typically, special agencies are created to accomplish such
tasks, both informational and related to enforcement. It is the complex of
such activities and arrangements that I think of as the effort to implement
the legislation.
   I make this remark here about what I think of as implementation because,
for example, one of the other people who, along with myself, received the
Economy Prize for mechanism design, uses a narrower definition of imple-
mentation. You see, among other things when I am talking about implemen-
tation -- or sometimes I refer to this as “genuine implementation” -- it means
that we have the money to run the institutions, we have the information to
run the institutions, and there is legislation authorizing this. Some people,
as I say, have a definition that doesn’t ask for quite that much, but this would
require a more elaborate model than the one I am using myself elsewhere in
this lecture.
   And I conclude this section by saying that implementation is successful if the
equilibrium outcomes correspond to those of the desired game, i.e., those
envisaged by the legislation.
   Expressed in this framework, a Nash equilibrium is not self-enforcing be-
cause, while it is unprofitable to move to alternative legal strategies, it may be
profitable, in the absence of enforcement, to move to illegal strategies.
   Similarly, Nash equilibria are not self-implementing because implement-
ing actions are required to ensure that the true outcome is the same as the
legal outcome.

10.1 BACK TO JUVENAL
Let us now come back to the initial problem, the need for guarding the
guardians. Juvenal’s cynical question suggests either that there is no way to
guard the guardians, or that, in addition to having “guardians of the first
level” (those guarding the wives), one must also, according to him, presum-
ably have “guardians of the second level” to guard the guardians of the first-
level. But the need to guard second-level guardians conjures the image of
an infinite regress of guardians. Since an infinity of guardians is not usually
available, this seems to preclude enforcement! Even if some guardians have
multiple clients (and that means that you don’t need an infinity of them),
the capacity for guarding may be exhausted, precluding successful enforce-
ment.
   So, from Juvenal one gets a very pessimistic view of human nature. But the
question is, “Is it quite so bad?” Let’s look at this question without using high-
powered statistical tools. Economists (some of them at least) refer to that as

286


“casual empiricism” – that is, just what one observes without being high-pow-
ered mathematically, statistically or whatever.

10.2 EMPIRICAL – NOT SO BAD
This “casual empiricism” suggests that there are many situations where rules
are substantially (if not perfectly) implemented and/or enforced. But many
factors are in the picture determining whether implementation of rules is
possible.

10.2.1 Physical
We shall now discuss different kinds of situations with respect to enforce-
ment. But let me make a point: At some place there may be a remark such
as “enforcement (or generally in implementation)”. Why is that? Well, for
example, part of an implementation program may be not taxing people, but
giving subsidies, for instance, to poor people to keep children healthy. So
that is also part of implementation. But you wouldn’t call giving extra money
to somebody enforcement. So that illustrates why implementation is a more
general concept than enforcement. But both are very important.
   First, though perhaps least important, implementation may depend on
purely physical or mechanical factors that do not require human guardians.
Examples: devices in parking lots that slash the tires of those who use un-
authorized exits; or punishment by placing the culprit on an isolated island
without a boat, and too far to swim ashore. That is from the customs of some
tribes, at least in the past, in Washington state, where they punished people
in that particular way. The point is that this relies on physical or mechanical
factors and not on any police or anything of that sort.

10.2.2 Intervenors
Second, and more importantly, there may be guardians (individual or col-
lective) who are in sympathy with the rules, for instance, whose ethical
standards rule out corrupt behavior. Such persons or groups, whom we will
call intervenors (that’s my own term – I don’t think anybody else uses it), may
have the ability (through power, financial assets, personal charisma, or status
combined with the population’s respect), as well as the inclination, to dis-
courage improper behavior of lower-level guardians. In this case the rule has
a chance to be successfully enforced. Well-functioning societies try to choose
judges and rulers from among such individuals. So my point here is that, just
because there are people who violate rules, behave illegally and so on, it does
not mean that everybody is like that. On the contrary, if you watch certain
judges, you observe that they honestly try to implement what they believe the
constitution says and just put it into effect. And that’s why I invented a word,
a term, to describe people of that kind. And I think maybe they are rare, but
not non-existent.




                                                                            287


10.3 ELECTIVE OFFICE HELPS
Juvenal’s pessimistic question suggests that there are no intervenors. Even in
that case, there are systems conducive to successful enforcement. Consider,
for example, a law designed to protect citizens from harmful or dangerous
behavior of certain individuals. Suppose that those charged with enforce-
ment of the law (first level guardians) are corrupt or otherwise ineffective,
and so are their supervisors (second level guardians). If the latter hold elec-
tive office, citizens who are voters (and of course, we assume free voting)
may function as third level guardians (as well as being guarded by first level
guardians). These voters have both an incentive and the power to intervene
by throwing the supervisors out of office. This gives the supervisors an incen-
tive to make sure that first level guardians discharge their duties properly.
Effective enforcement may be the result. So that’s really one role of democ-
racy in a system.
   I anticipate that some people don’t believe in the existence of intervenors.
I happen to. But, even if you don’t believe in intervenors, you still don’t ne-
cessarily have to be as cynical as Juvenal.
   As a special case one can imagine a situation with a finite number of guard-
ians, say guards 1, 2, and 3. Guard 1 watches the treasure. Guard 2 watches
guard 1. Guard 3 watches guard 2. But then guard 1 also watches guard 3. If
“watching” implies being successful in creating truthful behavior, then the
“circle” represented by such a system is successful. In this circle any guard
can also be an intervenor.
   The concept of intervenors can be used to compare Glaucon’s views on the
one hand with Juvenal’s on the other. In fact, Glaucon assumed that guard-
ians are intervenors.

10.4.1 Without intervenors
I start with the general statement that rational, self-interested behavior may
result in desired legal outcomes, even without intervenors.

10.4.2
In particular, there is no infinite regress where the electorate, directly or
indirectly, can make a difference. For instance, suppose voters remove a
corrupt official from office. The next, newly elected official, out of rational
self-interest, might refrain from corrupt practices, given that the people had
demonstrated their willingness to remove him or her from office based on
such practices. This does not require an infinite regress of dishonest guard-
ians, merely an aroused public, exhibiting rational self-interest.
   As an example of success without intervenors, members of an agency were
accepting bribes, and giving a percentage to their supervisors, who in turn
passed a percentage on to their supervisors. Higher judicial officials, how-
ever, set up a sting operation that resulted in the arrest and prosecution of
the corrupt members of the agency. The officials were not elective. However,
the sting operation advanced the careers of the officials, many of whom had
higher aspirations. It also protected them from possible blame for the cor-

288


ruption. Thus, it is reasonable to believe that the officials arranged the sting
operation out of rational self-interest. In any case, there was not an infinite
regression of dishonest guardians.
   I am not saying that rational self-interested behavior will always result in
non-corrupt behavior. However, the example of the officials does, I think,
provide an illustration of rational self-interested behavior leading to truthful
and uncorrupted behavior within a finite (not infinite) regression of guard-
ians.
   Similarly, a judge may want to advance to the post of attorney general, and
the Mayor may aspire to being governor or president. Given such aspirations,
and fear of negative consequences, we cannot rule out legal (as distinct from
illegal) behavior, even in the absence of intervenors.
   When implementation is possible, it can be modeled in terms of the rela-
tionship of the true game to the desired mechanism. The equilibria of the
true game depend on what is feasible, on the actual consequences, and on
the preferences of the players. Thus, to achieve equilibria of the true game
(not only the legal part of it, but including the illegal), the intervenor’s utility
function should have preferences that rule out his/her own illegal behavior.
On the other hand, strategies available to the intervenor should include pow-
ers and assets enabling him/her to influence others in the desired direction.
These features, including strategies available to the intervenor and the con-
sequences of their use, are contained in the true game-form mechanisms.
   Depending on the participants in the game (i.e., composition of the soci-
ety) and their preferences/values, a given desired mechanism may or may
not be implementable within that society. The history of prohibition, namely,
that it was never effectively enforced, may illustrate the negative case. Clearly,
implementability depends on the nature of the goal and attitudes toward
likely outcomes.


ETHICS
Legal behavior is not incompatible with rational, self-interested behavior.
This means that under the assumption of rational self-interest, Juvenal’s
claims about corrupt behavior being unavoidable cannot be accepted. And
this may be true even without counting on intervenors. What are our conclu-
sions? Those conclusions are divided in two groups: those that have to do
with the claim by Juvenal (or similar claims) on the one hand, and the claims
or conjectures by Samuelson. But genuine implementability may exist, even
without the presence of intervenors.
   So now, in the first group: Bad outcomes with an infinite regression are
logically possible, but enforcement (or more generally, implementation) is
not always impossible either, despite Juvenal’s claim or question. For one
thing, intervenors may exist. Also, particularly in a society where voters’ pref-
erences are freely expressed, citizens may act as top level guardians. By “top
level” we mean above all other guardians. Finally, it may be possible to create


                                                                                289


systems in which rational self-interest, due to a variety of rewards and punish-
ments, leads, or may lead, to legal and ethical behavior.
   The validity of Samuelson’s second conjecture (that is, that there may
be no successful implementation for public goods under decentralization)
remains, in my opinion, an open question. The example of voters removing
a corrupt official from office suggests that successful decentralization is pos-
sible. But the answer may depend on how we define decentralization. On the
other hand, Samuelson’s first point is clearly valid; namely, that the Lindahl
approach does not address situations where there may be a Nash equilib-
rium, but with illegalities or free riding.




290


REFERENCES
Calsamiglia, X. (1977), “Decentralized resource allocation and increasing returns,” Journal
    of Economic Theory, 14, pp. 263-283.
Groves, T. and J. Ledyard (1977), “Optimal allocation of public goods: A solution to the
    ‘free rider’ problem,” Econometrica, 45: pp. 783-811.
von Hayek, F. A. (1945), “The use of knowledge in society,” American Economic Review, 35:
    pp. 519-530.
Hurwicz, L. (1972a), “On the dimensional requirements of informationally decentral-
    ized Pareto-satisfactory processes,” in Studies in Resource Allocation Processes, Cambridge
    University Press, pp. 413-424.
Hurwicz, L. (1972b), “On informationally decentralized systems,” in Decision and Organization,
    C.B. McGuire and R. Radner, eds., North-Holland, Amsterdam and London, pp.
    297-336.
Hurwicz, L. (1979a), “Outcome functions yielding Walrasian and Lindahl allocations at
    Nash equilibrium points,” Review of Economic Studies, 46: pp. 217-225.
Hurwicz, L. (1979b), “Balanced outcome functions yielding Walrasian and Lindahl alloca-
    tions at Nash equilibrium points for two or more agents,” in General Equilibrium, Growth
    and Trade, J. R. Green and J. A. Sheinkman, eds., New York, Academic Press.
Hurwicz, L. (1993), “Implementation and enforcement,” in Political Economy, Institutions,
    Competition, and Representation, W. A. Barnett, M. J. Hinrich, and N. J. Schofield, eds.,
    Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, Chapter 2, pp. 51-59.
Hurwicz, L. (1996a), “Institutions as families of game forms,” The Japanese Economic Review,
    47: pp. 113-132.
Hurwicz, L. (1996b), “Feasible balanced outcome functions yielding constrained Walrasian
    and Lindahl allocations at Nash equilibrium points in economies with two agents when
    the designer knows the feasible set,” unpublished paper, presented in May 1997 at the
    Decentralization Conference, Pennsylvania State University.
Juvenal, D. (1895), Junii Juvenalis Saturarum Libri V, mit Erklärenden Anmerkungen von
    Ludwig Friedlaender, Erster Band, Leipzig, Verlag von S. Hirzel.
Maskin, E. (1977, published 1999), “Nash equilibrium and welfare optimality,” Review of
    Economic Studies, pp. 23-38.
Maskin, E. (1985), “The theory of implementation in Nash equilibrium: A Survey,” in
    Social Goals and Social Organization, Essays in Memory of Elisha Pazner, L. Hurwicz, D.
    Schmeidler and H. Sonnenschein, eds., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
    Chapter 6, pp. 173-204.
Ostrom, E., Walker, J. and R. Gardner (1992), “Covenants with and without a sword: self-
    governance is possible,” American Political Science Review, 86: pp. 404-417.
Plato, The Republic (0/,)4%)!), with an English translation by Paul Shorey. London:
    William Heinemann Ltd; New York: G.P. Putnam’s Sons, MCMXXX.
Plato, The Republic, translated by A. D. Lindsay. Everyman, J. M. Dent, London; Charles E.
    Tuttle, Vermont, 1992, 1995.
Schotter, A. (1981), The Economic Theory of Social Institutions, Cambridge University Press,
    Cambridge.
Portrait photo of Leonid Hurwicz by photographer Everett Ayoubzadeh.




                                                                                          291
