AN OUTLINE OF MY MAIN CONTRIBUTIONS TO
ECONOMIC SCIENCE
Nobel Lecture, December 9, 1988

by
MAURICE ALLAIS
Ecole Nationale Superieure des Mines de Paris et Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique - France




The Nobel Prize which has been awarded to me by the Royal Academy of
Sciences of Sweden is a very great honour by which I am deeply moved.
   I feel all the more honoured as for the first time this year the Prize-winner
in Economic Sciences delivers his Nobel lecture before the Royal Academy
of Sciences.
   It has become a tradition that the Prize-winner should present the main
contributions of his work which are directly related to the motivation of the
Prize which, in my case, is my “pioneering contributions to the theory of markets
and efficient utilization of resources”. I should like to interpret this motivation
in its broadest sense, that is to say, as relating to all those conditions which
may ensure that the economy satisfies with maximum efficiency the needs of
men given the limited resources they have at their disposal.




THE MOTIVATION OF MY CAREER AS AN ECONOMIST, MY 1943
BOOK, AND ITS SUBSEQUENT DEVELOPMENTS
The motivation of my career as an economist
The contributions I have made to Economic Science make up a whole; and
they can only be understood in the light of the motivations which prompted
my career as an economist.
   Fascinated by History during my secondary education, then by Physics
and Mechanics at the Ecole Polytechnique, I finally entered the national
administration of mines in 1936.
   My true inclinations, however, lay elsewhere, and isolated as I was in a pro-
vincial service, I devoted my leisure time to reading in the fields of physics and
probability theory. I even undertook, in 1939, to write a general work on
probability.
  Then came the war and the defeat of France. In July 1940, after my


234                           Economic Sciences 1988

demobilization, I resumed again my duties as an engineer in the State
mining administration at Nantes, in the zone occupied by the German army.
But my pre-war concerns had completely changed. For me, with all the
illusions of youth (I was only 29 at the time), it was clear that the best I could
do was to contribute to prepare for the post-war period.
   In the summer of 1933 I had visited the United States, then in the grip of
the Great Depression, a very astonishing phenomenon for which no gener-
ally acceptable explanation had been found. I had also been very close to
the social unrest which had broken out in France following the elections of
1936.
   What could be a better way of preparing for the aftermath of the war than
to try to find a solution to the fundamental problem of any economy,
namely how to promote the greatest feasible economic efficiency while ensuring a
distribution of income that would be generally acceptable.
   Thus, my vocation as an economist was not determined by my education,
but by circumstances. Its purpose was to endeavour to lay the foundations
on which an economic and social policy could be validly built.

My 1943 book - “A la Recherche d’une Discipline Economique. L’Economie
Pure "
Then, I bought, somewhat haphazardly, all the works on economics written
by French authors, or by foreign authors translated into French, which I
could find.
   It was in those days that a period in my life began which today seems to
me almost incomprehensible. How did I succeed in writing a book very
dense and very structured, of about nine hundred pages, “A la Recherche
d’une Discipline Economique. L’Economie Pure” (In Quest of an Economic
Discipline, Part I, Pure Economics), in only thirty months, from January
1941 to July 1943, a work which your Academy expressly referred to in the
statement of the reasons for its decision to award me the 1988 Nobel Prize
in Economic Science?
   Admittedly, the activity of the administrative service for which I was
responsible and which covered five French departments had slowed down
somewhat under the German occupation, but my duties required at least
 twenty-five hours each week. I had also to visit mines and quarries and to
make frequent trips to Paris, some five hundred kilometers away.
   At the time, I was no more than self-taught. In fact, my readings in
economics had really begun only in July 1940. From the handwritten notes
and, more particularly, from the dates which I used to inscribe on the books
that I read and annotated, it follows, for example, that it was only between
July 1940 and May 1941 that I read the fundamental works of Leon Walras,
Vilfredo Pareto and Irving Fisher, the three great economists who have had
the deepest influence on my thought.
   How did I succeed in writing such a book in so short a time and in the
particularly difficult conditions of the darkest years of the war and the
German occupation of France? How was I able to complete the “Introduc-


                                       M. Allais                                 235

tion” to this book by July lst, 1941, only one year after being demobilized?
How was I able, within that same period of thirty months, to prepare
efficiently the material for the five volumes which were to follow?
   How did I succeed, at the same time, in finding a printer for the book,
paper (very scarce at the time) for its printing, and in organizing a subscrip-
tion in view of the refusal of all the publishers I had contacted to publish
this book?
   All this may appear totally unbelievable today, and yet all that work was
effectively carried out and entirely completed within only thirty months.
   No words, perhaps, can describe more aptly the sort of exaltation I
experienced at the time than these extracts from a letter written by Leibniz:
"I wished to swim by myself, without any master. . . Frequently, in the light of a few
lines encountered in my reading, I drew the substance of countless meditations . . . ”
I should add that I was guided, although unwittingly, by the fundamental
principle set forth by Abel, “To read only the great masters in their original
works”.
   Thus, my 1943 book was the work of a mere amateur, but a passionate
one, and were anyone to be somewhat surprised to learn that the Royal
Academy of Sciences of Sweden had expressly referred to the work of an
author who called himself an amateur, he would only betray an ignorance of
all that amateurs have been able to contribute to science over the centuries.
Indeed, within their ranks are to be found such great figures as Fermat,
Leibniz, Lavoisier, Mendel, Pasteur, Louis de Broglie, and so many others,
who, in their early careers, or even, in some cases, throughout their whole
life, were only amateurs. Walras and Pareto were, themselves, only self-
taught, only amateurs.
   Amateurs are usually detested by professionals and members of any kind
of “establishment”; but they do possess onevery exceptional advantage, that of
never having been conditioned by university training and the constant
repetition of “established truths”, and, therefore, of being able to examine
every question with a fresh eye, without any preconception and prejudice.

The developments following from my 1943 book
As a matter of fact, my 1943 book was the starting point of all my subse-
quent publications, which have merely extended and complemented it in
the various domains of the economic science at which I have worked, always
pursuing the same aim: the rigorous foundation of a general theory in full
agreement with empirical data.
   Initially, as stated in its opening pages, my book was to be followed by five
other volumes, the first three dealing respectively with the theory of inter-
est, monetary theory, and the international economy; the fourth devoted to
an analysis of the disequilibria of the real economy; and the fifth volume, of
a normative nature, ‘L’Economie de l’Avenir” (The Economy of the Future).
  This very ambitious project proved to be somewhat unrealistic and I
thought it was preferable to abandon it. Much of the content of the second,
third and fifth volumes was published in 1947 in a book entitled “Economic


236                         Economic Sciences 1988

et Intérêt” (Economy and Interest), which your Academy also expressly
referred to. Once again, this publication was made possible only through a
subscription.
   Indeed, my entire work has been but the gradual realization of the
program I set myself in 1943. This task is not yet completed, and it is still
being carried on.
   While my initial motivation was normative, while it corresponded, to a
large extent, to the preoccupations expressed by Walras in his “Etudes
d’Economie Sociale” (Studies in Social Economy), I have nonetheless con-
stantly endeavoured to establish a clear distinction in my analyses between
my work on the fundamental Economic Science and that on applied eco-
nomics and political economy.
   Throughout my work, my dominant concern has been with synthesis: to
bring together into one comprehensive view the study of real and monetary
phenomena; to associate the analysis of the conditions for efficiency and
that of income distribution; to link closely theoretical analysis and applied
economics; to relate economics to the other social sciences, Psychology,
Sociology, Political Science, and History. Such have been my constant aims.
   I believe that this concern with a synthesized conception of all economic
and social phenomena constitutes the basis for all my thinking, and for the
close connection between my work in theoretical economics and my work in
applied economics. This concern explains what, it seems to me, constitutes
the deep underlying unity in all my work.
   My approach has never been to start from theories to arrive at facts, but
on the contrary, to try to bring out from the facts the explanatory thread
without which they appear incomprehensible and elude effective action.
   On the whole, my work has been a response to the need I have felt to
understand concrete reality and to provide satisfactory answers to the
questions suggested to me by the obscurities, contradictions, and gaps in
the existing literature. My work has thus been a long, and often painful
endeavour to steer away from the beaten paths and dominant ideas of my
time.
   At the beginning of my career, my desire to understand was associated
with a profound desire to act, with the wish to influence opinion and policy;
but, over the years, this motivation has come to be of secondary impor-
tance, far behind my desire to understand.


II
MAIN CONTRIBUTIONS TO ECONOMIC SCIENCE
My contributions to fundamental economic analysis have dealt essentially
with five fields, all related to the search for the conditions of the greatest
possible economic efficiency and to the analysis of the income distribution it
implies, fields in which I have been working continuously since 1941; the
theory of economic evolution and general equilibrium, of maximum effi-


                                      M. Allais                               237

ciency, and of the foundations of “economic calculus”‘; the theory of
intertemporal processes and maximum capitalistic efficiency; the theory of
choices under uncertainty and the criteria to be considered for rational
economic decisions; the theory of money, credit, and monetary dynamics;
and probability theory, as well as the analysis of time series and their
exogenous components.
   In each of these fields, I believe, I have freed myself from current
conceptions, opened up original paths, and brought out new perspectives.
   In the following I will limit myself to commenting very brief on those of
my contributions which may be considered, in the sense of Alfred Nobel’s
will, to be either major contributions to fundamental Economic Science, or
even, if I may say so, genuine discoveries.

Theory of Economic Evolution and General Equilibrium, of Maximum Efficiency,
and of the Foundations of Economic Calculus
My work on economic evolution and general equilibrium, maximum effi-
ciency, and the foundations of economic calculus has developed in two
successive phases, from 1941 to 1966, and from 1967 to the present day.
   To a large extent, my 1943 book, “A la Recherche d‘une Discipline Economi-
que. L ‘Economic Pure”, focused on the proof of two fundamental propositions:
any state of equilibrium of a market economy is a state of maximum
efficiency, and, vice versa, any state of maximum efficiency is a state of
equilibrium of a market economy (equivalence theorems).
   In the framework of Walras’ model of the market economy, a rigorous
proof of these remarkably simple propositions, which had already been
foreshadowed by the classical economists, raises many difficulties. I believe
that I gave, for the first time, a proof of great generality, for an economy
considered at a given time but taking the future into account.
   This proof takes into account the second order conditions and is free of
any unrealistic hypothesis of general convexity regarding the production
sets. It shows up the arbitrary character of the distribution of income. The
formulation of discounted values appears as a condition of maximum
efficiency.
   In this work, I defined four quite fundamental new concepts: the concept of
the surface of maximum possibilities in the hyperspace of preference indices of the
consumption units; the concept of distributable surplus corresponding to a
feasible modification of the economy from a given situation; the concept of
loss, defined as the maximum distributable surplus for all feasible modifica-
tions of the economy which leave the preference indices unchanged; and
the related concept of surfaces of equal loss in the hyperspace of preference
indices.
   During the winter of 1966-1967, I was led to discard the Walrasian
general model of the market economy, characterized at any time, whether
there be equilibrium or not, by a single price system, the same for all the

1
    In French: “calcul économique”.


238                           Economic Sciences 1988

operators, - a completely unrealistic hypothesis, - and to establish the theory
of economic evolution and general equilibrium, of maximum efficiency,
and of the foundations of economic calculus, on entirely new bases resting
on the concept of distributable surplus which I had elaborated and used in my
1943 book, and on a new model, the model of the economy of markets (in the
plural).
   According to this new approach, which had already been outlined in
numerous developments of my 1943 book, the whole of economic dynamics
in real terms is founded on the search for, the realization and the distribution of
surpluses. This new approach allows remarkably simple proofs of the two
equivalence theorems, without any restrictive hypothesis, whether it be of
continuity, differentiability, or general convexity. It also allows the defini-
tion of a system of rules of the game whose implementation is likely to lead
to states of maximum efficiency. When no surplus can be achieved, then
there is general economic equilibrium, and maximum efficiency.
   This theory is based on thefundamental concepts of distributable surplus, loss,
and surfaces of maximum efficiency and equal loss presented and developed in my
1943 book, and it permits the integration of money into the theory of general
economic equilibrium and maximum efficiency.
   In its general principles, my theory of surpluses generalizes the marginalist
analyses of the nineteenth century by considering not merely differential vari-
ations but also discrete variations, and by taking into account the complex
interactions of the variations of all the quantities within the economy as a
whole. It constitutes in fact a synthesis of the marginalistic approach of
causality and the Walrasian approach of functional interdependence, two
complementary approaches, the analysis of which I had already presented in
a chapter of my 1943 book.
   Not only does this theory give a realistic representation of economic
dynamics, free from any useless hypothesis, but it also affords a better
understanding of the true significance of the functioning of the economy
under its twofold aspect of management and distribution, which it presents
in a completely new light.
   This theory lends itself just as well to the analysis of international trade as
to the analysis of national economies, and just as well to the analysis of
Eastern and Third World economies as to the analysis of Western econo-
mies.
   I think that my general theory of surpluses constitutes very considerable
progress, and is indeed quite revolutionary, by comparison not only with all
previous theories but also with all contemporary theories.

Theory of inter-temporal processes and of optimal capitalistic structure
My book, Economie et Intérêt (Economy and Interest), published in 1947,
presented a general theory of the efficiency of intertemporal processes with
two particularly significant original contributions: the extension of the
theory of maximum efficiency to the case where one considers the different
generation, and the theory of productivity of capital.


                                       M. Allais                               239

    Firstly, when future generations are taken into account, fundamental
 circumstances come to light which, even today, are very largely overlooked in
 the literature. Essentially, this analysis shows that, while the uniqueness of
 interest rates is a condition of efficiency in the production sector, it is not so
 in the economy as a whole.
    It follows that the classical theory, according to which an equilibrium of
 the supply of and the demand for capital leads to an intrinsic optimum, is
 unacceptable, and that in particular a policy of compulsory saving for old
 age is perfectly compatible with conditions of intertemporal maximum
 efficiency.
    Secondly, my theory of the maximum productivity of capital analyzes the
 influence of the more or less indirect character of production processes on
 the level of real national income, itself related to the wage rate of interest
 (i.e. the average value of the wages being taken as a unit). This theory has
 provided, to my knowledge for the first time in the literature, a rigorous proof of
 the existence of a state of “maximum maximorum” for a stationary process. Such a
 state corresponds to a zero wage rate of interest.
    The theory rests on two new concepts: that of primary income (the overall
 value of wages and land rents), and that of the characteristic function, repre-
 senting the intertemporal production processes, concepts I have elaborated
 by generalizing the penetrating analyses of Georges Bousquet, themselves
 inspired by those of Stanley Jevons.
    This theory constitutes the basis on which all my subsequent works are
 founded. In the case of a dynamic process, I showed in 1961 that the
 situation of “maximum maximorum ” corresponds to the equality of the wage rate of
 interest and the rate of growth of the primary income (golden rule of accumula-
 tion). I think I have given the first general and rigorous proof of this theorem.
    To my knowledge,of all the theories of dynamic capitalistic processes, the one I
 have presented is the only one which lends itself to numerical applications. It is
fully confirmed by empirical data.

Theory of choice under uncertainty and the criteria for rational economic decisions
My theory of choice under uncertainty stems from a twofold motivation: -
the desire to extend the theories of general economic equilibrium and
maximum efficiency to an economy with uncertainty; a critical analysis of
the 1947 Theory of Games of von Neumann and Morgenstern, and the
criteria for rational economic decisions.
   In order to generalize the theories of general economic equilibrium and
maximum efficiency to the case of risk, I showed in a 1952 paper how it was
possible to take into account uncertainty with regard to the future, fields of
choices under uncertainty, and operations relating to the composition of
risks (a transposition in the case of uncertainty of production functions
concerning the transformation of physical goods).
   In the Theory of Games, von Neumann and Morgenstern presented both a
method for determining cardinal utility and a rational rule of behaviour.
Both are based on the consideration of an index which may be called the


240                          Economic Sciences 1988

neo-Bernouillian utility index. The theory devised by von Neumann and
Morgenstern demonstrates the existence of this index from a system of
postulates, and they identified it with cardinal utility in Jevons’ sense.
According to them, in order to be rational, any operator must maximize the
mathematical expectation of this index.
   This stance struck me as being unacceptable because it amounts to neglect-
ing the probability distribution of psychological values around their mean, which
precisely represents the fundamental psychological element of the theory of
risk.
   I illustrated my argumentation through counter-examples; one of them
became famous as the “Allais Paradox”. In fact, the ‘Allais Paradox” is
paradoxical in appearance only, and it merely corresponds to a very pro-
found psychological reality, the preference for security in the neighbourhood of
certainty.
   In order to test empirically the conflicting doctrines regarding rational
behaviour in the face of uncertainty, I carried out a survey in 1952 involving
about a hundred subjects with good training in and knowledge of the theory
of probability so that they could be considered to behave rationally.
   It was not, however, until 1974 - 1976 that I was able to carry out a
thorough analysis of the answers provided by the 1952 survey. This analysis
fully confirmed the conclusions of my 1952 paper by showing that, for every
subject, there was no index, the maximization of whose mathematical expectation
could explain the observed behaviour.
   Furthermore, this survey allowed me to show that, for all the subjects
analyzed, there exists an index of psychological value, or cardinal utility, which
can be determined independently of the consideration of any choice under
uncertainty.
   The corresponding cardinal utility function is invariant from one individ-
ual to another when one considers the relative variations of capital, and the
knowledge of this function enables quantitative analysis of questions which,
up to now, have remained beyond the scope of any accurate calculation, such as the
psychological incidence of the transfer of wealth from the richest to the
poorest, or the assessment of the psychological incidence of tax burdens.

Theory of money, credit, and monetary dynamics
Experience has shown that there can be neither economic efficiency nor equitable
distribution of income in an economy with monetary instability, which is subject to
major fluctuations, such as those corresponding to the Great Depression of
1929 - 1934. It was this fact which led me from 1941 onward to think over
monetary phenomena, money, credit, and economic fluctuations.
   In two papers published in 1954 and 1955, I presented a non-linear
explanatory model of the fluctuations of global expenditure. The model is
based on an equation that I have called thefundamental equation of monetary
dynamics, and on a hereditary formulation of the demand for and the supply of
money. Through this model, it is possible to express variations in global
expenditure as a function of the difference between the supply of and the


                                         M. Allais                                 241

 demand for money, the latter being functionals of past variations in global
 expenditure.
     It can be seen that, for values of parameters close to those provided by
 experience, the model presents limit cycles whose duration and amplitude
 are little different from those observed.
     These two papers constitute the foundations on which I based my general theory of
 monetary dynamics in all its later developments.
     In various papers presented between 1965 and 1987, I extended the
 previous results by specifying the functions of the demand for and supply of
 money on the basis of an entirely new formulation. This formulation is
 hereditary in so far as it determines the present as a function of the past, and
 it is relativistic in the sense that such dependence is invariant when physical
 time is replaced by psychological time. It postulates that the past is forgotten
 in the same way as the future is discounted.
    This means that at any given moment in time the common value of the
 rate of forgetfulness and the rate of interest is itself an invariant functional
 of previous variations of global expenditure.
     Today, my theory of monetary dynamics is based on four main pillars: the
fundamental equation of monetary dynamics, and the three hereditary and relativis-
 tic formulations of the demand for money, the supply of money, and the rates of
forgetfulness and psychological interest.
    This theory essentially rests on original guiding ideas which are applicable
 to many fields, such as Economics, Psychology, Sociology and Political
 Science. They are: the fundamental analogy between forgetting the past and
 discounting the future; the herediatary psychological process of forgetful-
 ness; the consideration of psychological time; the hereditary conditioning of
 men by past events; the hereditary propagation of monetary phenomena
 with a gradual weakening through time; the concept of lagged regulation
 implying the existence of limit cycles.
    My theory of monetary dynamics is based on the introduction of new
 concepts which have no equivalent in the earlier literature; the concepts of the
psychological rate of interest, the rate of forgetfulness, and the reaction time,
 whose values vary according to the economic situation; the concept of the
 coefficient of psychological expansion which represents the average appraisal of
 the economic situation by all economic agents; the concept of psychological
 time, the referential of psychological time being such that the laws of
 monetary dynamics remain invariant therein.
    Once an appropriate measurement of the quantity of money is available,
 the empirical verifications of the new theory are very remarkable. This is the
 only case I know of in the entire history of econometric research where a model which
 uses only one single explanatory variable, and includes only two arbitrary param-
eters, or even only one, according to the approach considered, has been able to
provide, in cases so numerous and so different, such good results, far better indeed
than those of all the other theories proposed before or after its publication.
    By revealing the existence of invariant effects of a hereditary and relativistic type
 in social phenomena, the new approach opens up wide perspectives, hitherto


242                           Economic Sciences 1988

unsuspected. The results obtained show that everything happens as if, irre-
spective of the institutional framework, contingent historical situations, and
individual aspirations, people react in the same way, somewhat mechanical-
ly, to similar complex sequences of events. They show that we are conditioned
by our past, and they open up new perspectives in the general debate on determinism
and free choice.

Probability theory, and the analysis of time series and their exogenous components
Reflection on the theory of choice under uncertainty and the search for the
fundamental factors underlying the fluctuations of time series, and particu-
larly the fluctuations of the residuals of the best empirically verified models,
led me to a critical analysis of the concept of chance and of probability
theories, to the proof of a new theorem, the “T Theorem”, and to the
introduction of a new concept, the “X Factor”, which represents the exoge-
nous physical influence on time series.
   The mathematical theories generally called “mathematical theories of
chance” actually ignore chance, uncertainty, and probability. The models
they consider are purely deterministic, and the quantities they study are, in
the final analysis, no more than the mathematical frequencies of particular
configurations, among all equally possible configurations, the calculation of
which is based on combinatorial analysis. In reality, no axiomatic definition
of chance is conceivable.
   According to the “X Factor” hypothesis, the fluctuations in time series
that we observe in physical, biological and psychological phenomena result,
to a large extent, from the influence, through resonance effects, of count-
less vibrations which fill the space in which we live, and whose existence is by
now a certainty. Thus, we can explain, to a large extent, the structure of the
fluctuations, at first sight so incomprehensible, that we observe in very
many time series, such as, for example, those in sunspots or in stock
exchange quotations. In fact, these fluctuations present all the features of
an almost periodic structure.
   To such a structure there corresponds an almost periodic function, defined
as the sum of sinusoi’dal components of which certain have incommensura-
ble periods. It follows from the “T Theorem” that under very general
conditions, the successive values of an almost periodic function are normal-
ly distributed. It is thus established that the deterministic vibratory structure of the
universe can bring about seemingly random effects, and that determinism can
generate what is commonly referred to as chance.


III
MY CONCEPTION OF ECONOMIC SCIENCE
The above are the main original and innovative contributions which I
believe I have made to fundamental Economic Science. Now I should like to
sum up in a few words the principles which I have constantly followed in my
work ever since my first book in 1943.


                                     M. Allais                                 243

The fundamental criterion of experience
Firstly, the prerequisite of any science is the existence of regularities which can be
analysed and forecast. This is for example the case in celestial mechanics. But
it is also true of many economic phenomena. Indeed, their thorough
analysis displays the existence of regularities which are just as striking as
those found in the physical sciences. This is why Economics is a science and
why this science rests on the same general principles and methods as the
physical sciences.
   All science is based on models and every scientific model comprises three
distinct stages: statement of well-defined hypotheses; deduction of all the
consequences of these hypotheses, and nothing but these consequences;
confrontation of these consequences with observed data. Of these three
stages, only the first and the third - establishing hypotheses, and confronting
results with reality - are of interest to the economist. The second stage is
purely logical and mathematical, that is tautological, and is only of math-
ematical interest.
   The model and the theory it represents must be accepted, at least tempo-
rarily, or rejected, depending on the agreement or disagreement between
observed data and the hypotheses and implications of the model. When
neither the hypotheses nor the implications of a theory can be confronted with the real
world, that theory is devoid of any scientific interest. Mere logical, even math-
ematical, deduction remains worthless in terms of the understanding of
reality if it is not closely linked to that reality.
   Submission to observed or experimental data is the golden rule which dominates
any scientific discipline. Any theory whatever, if it is not verified by empirical
evidence, has no scientific value and should be rejected.
   This is true, for example, of contemporary theories of general economic
equilibrium which are based on the hypothesis of general convexity of the
fields of production, a hypothesis which is disproved by all the empirical
data and leads to absurd consequences. That is also the case of the neo-
Bernoullian theories of expected utility which are founded on postulates
whose consequences are incompatible with observed data.
   My approach has always been based on a twofold conviction: the convic-
tion that, without theory, knowledge inevitably remains confused and that
an accumulation of facts only constitutes a chaotic and unavoidably incom-
prehensible aggregate; and the even stronger conviction that a theory which
cannot be confronted with the facts or which has not been verified quantita-
tively by observed data, is, in fact, devoid of any scientific value.

The illustration of theories by models
Secondly, I have always illustrated the general theories I have presented
through particular models for which all calculations can be carried out
explicitly.
   My conviction is indeed that no general theory can be really understood if
it is not illustrated by the consideration of particular models, judiciously
chosen in order to make possible the analysis of all relevant circumstances,


244                           Economic Sciences 1988

and devised in such a way as to show up very clearly the implications of the
hypotheses.
  Just as there can be no scientifically valid theory which is not general and
not applicable to all particular cases, so there is no general theory which can
be fully understood if it is not illustrated by its application to particular
cases. The more general a theory, the more its illustration by appropriate
models ensures a full understanding of its significance and scope.

 The confrontation of theories with empirical evidence and the search for invariants
Thirdly, my work has been marked by a growing concern for numerical
applications based on numerical data provided by observation.
   The empirical verifications of my hereditary and relativistic theory of
monetary dynamics are quite remarkable; indeed they are the most extraor-
dinary ones that have ever been found in the Social Sciences, and this is in a
field essential to the life of society. In fact, the observed reality is represent-
ed in an almost perfect manner by the formulation to which this theory
leads, whether it is applied to, for example, the United States during the
Great Depression, the German hyperinflation from December 1919 to
October 1923 (during which period the price index, on the basis of 1913 =
 100, reached the value of 1012), or Soviet Russia’s hyperinflation from
January 1922 to February 1924. These results demonstrate the underlying
existence of structural regularities in social phenomena which are as striking
as those observed in the physical sciences.
   I have been gradually led to a twofold conviction: human psychology
remains fundamentally the same at all times and in all places; and the
present is determined by the past according to invariant laws. It seems to me
that, to a very large extent, the social sciences must, like the physical
sciences, be based on the search for relationships and quantities invariant in
time and in space.
   Thus, whatever the economics considered, whether in the past or in the
present, the whole human economic activity comes down to the search for,
and the realization and distribution of surpluses according to fundamental-
ly invariant processes.
   My theory of intertemporal processes brings out an invariant structure as
regards the relationship between production at any given time and the
factors of production supplied in the past which may be considered to be
the source of this production.
   The analysis of the answers to the survey I undertook in 1952 led me to
the conclusion that cardinal utility does exist, and that for all subjects this
cardinal utility can be represented by an invariant function of the relative
variations of their capital.
   The theory of monetary dynamics which I have elaborated rests on the
consideration of a hereditary link, invariant in time and space, between the
present and past evolution. The results show that human societies, within
very different contexts - whether they correspond to current situations,
either inflationary or deflationary, or to hyperinflations, to capitalist or


                                      M. Allais                                  245


communist countries, either today or a century ago - behave in a similar
way. Thus, the general study of our conditioning by the past may be
founded on this basis, and the hereditary and relativistic formulation which
I arrived at may be used in numerous applications in all fields of the human
sciences.

 The use of mathematics
 Fourthly, I have been constantly led to use mathematics in all the cases
 where ordinary logic was manifestly insufficient for the analysis of economic
 phenomena, which are essentially quantitative, and often very complex.
 This use enabled me to provide rigorous solutions to problems which would
 otherwise have been intractable on account of their complexity.
    However, mathematics is not and cannot be anything more than a tool,
 and all my work rests on the conviction that, in its use, the only two really
fruitful stages in the scientific approach are, firstly, a thorough examination of the
 initial hypotheses; and, secondly, a discussion of the meaning and empirical
 relevance of the results obtained. What remains is but tautological calculation
 which is of interest only to the mathematician, and the mathematical rigour
 of the reasoning can never justify a theory based on postulates if these
 postulates do not correspond to the true nature of the observed phenom-
 ena.
    The use of even the most sophisticated forms of mathematics can never
 be considered as a guarantee of quality. Mathematics is, and can only be, a
 means of expression and reasoning. The real substance on which the
 economist works remains economic and social. Indeed, one must avoid the
 development of a complex mathematical apparatus whenever it is not
 strictly indispensable. Genuine progress never consists in a purely formal
 exposition, but always in the discovery of the guiding ideas which underlie
 any proof. It is these basic ideas which must be explicitly stated and
 discussed.
    Mathematics cannot be an end in itself. It can be and should only be a
 means.

New ideas and the tyranny of dominant doctrines
Finally, I have never hesitated to question commonly accepted theories
when they appeared to me to be founded on hypotheses which implied
consequences incompatible with observed data.
   Indeed, it is only through the constant questioning of “established truths”
and the blossoming of new ideas suggested both by empirical evidence and
by creative intuition, that science can truly progress. But all genuine scienti-
fic progress comes up against the tyranny of the dominant ideas generated
by the “establishment “. The more such dominant ideas are taken for granted,
the more they become rooted in the psychology of men, and the more
difficult it becomes to gain acceptance for a new conception, no matter how
fruitful it may later turn out to be.
   Dominant ideas, however erroneous they may be, end up, simply through


246                             Economic Sciences 1988

continual repetition, by acquiring the quality of established truths which
cannot be questioned without confronting the active ostracism of the “estab-
lishment “. The examples of Copernicus, Galileo, Abel, Galois, Pasteur,
Arrhenius, Wegener, and many others, demonstrate the obstacles encoun-
tered by discoverers of genius.
   It is this resistance to new ideas that explains why in Economics it took so
long before the major contributions of Dupuit, Walras, Edgeworth, Pareto,
and many others were acknowledged. Walras’ Elements d‘Economic Pure were
not translated into English until seventy-five years after its publication.
Some sixty years were to elapse before Pareto’s Manuel d’Economie Politique
was to be published in English.
   The successful scholar is always the one who adds some marginal im-
provement to the dominant theories to which everyone is accustomed. If,
however, a new theory falls outside established paths, it is certain to face
general opposition whatever its justifications.
   For all of these reasons, it is essential to subject “established truths”
constantly to a critical analysis without indulgence, while always bearing in
mind Pareto’s statement: "The history of science boils down to the history of errors
of competent men”.
   Whatever the price he might pay for it in his career, the scientist should never
steer his course according to the fashions of the day, or of the approval or
disapproval of his contemporaries. His sole concern must be with the quest
for truth. This is a principle from which I have never departed.
                                          *
                                         **

  Finally, I should like to express once more my deep gratitude for the very
great distinction which has been awarded to me.
  As Walras once wrote, the true scholar undoubtedly seeks truth for its
own sake, but he cannot be insensitive to the recognition of the value of his
work. Whatever they may have said, the most eminent scientists have never
remained completely indifferent to the opinions of others.


MAIN REFERENCES
Theory of Economic Evolution and General Equilibrium, of Maximum Efficiency, and   of the
Foundations of Economic Calculus

1943    A la Recherche d’une Discipline Economique - Premiére Partie - L’Economie
        Pure (In Quest of an Economic Discipline - Part One - Pure Economics)
          First edition, Ateliers Industria, Paris, 1943, 852 p. and Appendices, 68 p.
          Second edition, published with the help of the “Centre National de la
        Recherche Scientifique”, under the title: Traité d’Economie Pure (Treatise on
        Pure Economics), Imprimerie Nationale, 5 vol., in 40, Paris, 1952, 984 p.
        This second edition differs only from the first in that a 63 page introduction
        has been added.
1945    Economic Pure et Rendement Social (Pure Economics and Social Efficiency).
        Paris, Sirey, 1945, 72 p.


                                         M. Allais                                   247

1967    Les Conditions de l’Efficacité dans L’Economie (The Conditions of Efficiency in
        the Economy)
           Report presented at the Fourth International Seminar organised by the
        “Centro Studi e Richerche su Problemi Economico-Sociali” of Milan, Sept. 12-
        14th, 1967, 145 p.
           Republished by the Ecole Nationale Supérieure des Mines de Paris, 1968.
1968    The Conditions of Efficiency in the Economy
          Economia Internazionale, Vol. XXI, no 3, p. 3-24.
1971    Les Théories de l’Equilibre Economique Général et de l’Efficacité Maximale -
        Impasses Récentes et Nouvelles Perspectives (Theories of General Economic
        Equilibrium and Maximum Efficiency - Recent Blind Alleys and New
        Perspectives)
          Revue d’Economie Politique, May-June 1971, no 3, p. 331-409.
1973    La Théorie Générale des Surplus et l’Apport Fondamental de Vilfredo Pareto
          Revue d’Economie Politique, Nov. - Dec. 1973, no 6, 83è année, p. 1044-
        1097.
1973*   The General Theory of Surplus and Pareto’s Fundamental Contribution
          Convegno Internationale Vilfredo Pareto (Roma, 25-27 Ottobre 1973),
        Roma, Accademia Nationale dei Lincei, 1975, p. 109-163, (English transla-
        tion of Allais, 1973).
1974    Theories of General Economic Equilibrium and Maximum Efficiency
           In the volume: Equilibrium and Disequilibrium in Economic Theory, D. Reidel
        Publishing Company, Dordrecht, 1977, p. 129-201 (English translation of
        Allais, 1971. The English version only differs from the French one in a few
        marginal additions, particularly in note 18).
1975    Les Implications de Rendements Croissants et Décroissants sur les Conditions de
        l’Equilibre Economique Général et d’une Efficacité Maximale (The Implications
        of Marginal Increases and Decreases in the Production Functions on the
        Conditions for Genera1 Economic Equilibrium and Maximum Efficiency)
          In the volume: Hommage à Francois Perroux, Presses Universitaires de
        Grenoble, 1978, p. 605-674.
1978    La Théorie Générale des Surplus (The General Theory of Surpluses)
          Economies et Sociétés Paris, January-May 1981, Institut de Sciences
        Mathématiques et Economiques, 2 vol., 718 p.
          Second edition: Presses Universitaires de Grenoble, 1989.
1984    The Concepts of Surplus and Loss, and the Reformulation of the General Theory of
        Economic Equilibrium and Maximum Efficiency
          In: “Production and Exchange, The Foundations of Economic Knowledge”, M.
        Baranzini et R. Scazzieri, edit., Blackwell, Oxford, 1985, p. 135-174.
1987    The Equimarginal Principle. Meaning, Limits and Generalization
          Rivista Internazionale di Scienze Economiche E Commerciali, Vol. 34, 1987, N.
        8, p. 689-750.
1987    Economic Surplus and the Equimarginal Principle
          The New Palgrave. A Dictionary of Economics, Macmillan, Vol. 2, p. 62-69,
        1987.

Theory of Intertemporal Processes and of Optimal Capitalistic Structure
1947 Economic et Inérêt (Economy and Interest)
           Imprimerie Nationale et Librairie des Publications Officielles, Paris, 800
        pages in Two volumes, 1947.
1960    Influence du Coefficient Capitalistique sur le Revenu Réel par Tête
           (The Influence of the Capital Output Ratio on Real per Capita Income)
           Memoir presented to the Tokyo Conference (June 1960) of the Interna-
        tional Statistical Institute, Document 61, 70 p., and Tome XXXVIII, 2,
        Tokyo, 1961, p. 3-27.


248                             Economic Sciences 1988

1961    The Influence of the Capital Output Ratio on Real National Income
           Walras Bowley Lecture, American Meeting of the Econometric Society,
        New York, December 28, 1961, Econometrica, Vol. 30, no 4, October 1962.
           Republished in Readings in Welfare Economics, American Economic Associ-
        ation, Vol. XII, 1969, p. 682-714, with an “Additional Note”, p. 711-714.
1963    Some Analytical and Practical Aspects of the Theory of Capital
           Memoir presented to the Cambridge Conference of the International Economic
        Association (July 1963).
           Published in: Activity Analysis in the Theory of Growth and Planning, E.
        Malinvaud and M. Bacharach, edit., MacMillan, London and St Martin’s
        Press, New York, 1967, p. 64-107.
1963    The Role of Capital in Economic Development
           Memoir presented at the Semaine d ‘Etude sur le Rôle de l ‘Analyse Econométri-
        que dans la Formulation de Plans de Développement, organised by the Pontifical
        Academy of Social Sciences (Rome, 7-13 October 1963).
           Published in the volume Le Rôle de l’Analyse Econométrique dans la Formula-
        tion de Plans de Développement, Pontificiae Academiae Scientiarum Scripta
        Varia, 28, Pontifica Academia Scientiarum, 1965, Vol. II, p. 697-1002.
           Also published in The Econometric Approach to Development Planning, North
        Holland Publishing Co, Amsterdam and Rand Mac Nally, Chicago, 1965, p.
        697-1002.
1966    Produit National Brut Réel, Revenu National Réel, et Fonction de Cobb-Douglas
        (Real Gross National Product, Real National Income, and the Cobb-Douglas
        Function)
           Paper published in the volume: La Statistica Come Methodologia Delle Science
        Sociali, in honour of Professor Gini, Statistical Institute, Rome 1966. And
        also: Metron, Vol. XXV, no l-4, 31 XII 1966, p. 310-355.


Theory of Choice Under Uncertainty and the Criteria for Rational Economic Decisions
1952    La Généralisation des Theories de l’Equilibre Economique General et du Rendement
        Social au Cas du Risque (Generalization of the Theories of General Economic
        Equilibrium and Economic Efficiency to the Case of Risk)
           Memoir presented at the Paris International Symposium of the Centre
        National de la Recherche Scientifique on the “Fondements et Applications de la
        Théorie du Risque en Econométrie” (Foundations and Applications of the
        Theory of Risk in Econometrics), Paris, May 12-17, 1952.
          This memoir was published in the volume “Econométric”, Collection des
        Colloques Internationaux du Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Vol.
        XL, Paris, 1953, p. 81-120.
1952    Fondements d'une Théorie Positive des Choix comportant un Risque et Critique des
        Postulats et Axiomes de l‘Ecole Américaine (The Foundations of a Positive
        Theory of Choice Involving Risk and a Criticism of the Postulates and
        Axioms of the American School)
          Comprehensive memoir written further to the debates of the Paris inter-
        national Symposium
          Actes du Colloque (Proceedings of the Symposium), id., p. 257-332.
          This memoir was republished in 1955 with a few minor additions in a
        special issue of the Annales des Mines and as a separative volume by the
        Imprimerie Nationale (56 p. in 40).
1952    La Psychologie de l’Homme Rationnel devant le Risque. La Théorie et l’Expérience
        (The Psychology of Rational Behavior in the Presence of Risk - Theory and
        Experience)
          Journal de la Société de Statistique de Paris, January - March 1953, p. 47-
        73.


                                        M. Allais                                     249

1952   L’Extension des Théories de l’Equilibre Economique Général et du Rendement
       Social au Cas du Risque (Extension of the Theories of General Economic
       Equilibrium and Economic Efficiency to the Case of Risk)
         Econometrica, Vol. 21, no 2, April 1953, p. 269-290.
1952   Le Comportement de l’Homme Rationel devant le Risque. Critique des Postulats et
       Axiomes de l’Ecole Américaine (Rational Behavior under Risk - Criticism of
       the Postulates and Axioms of the American School)
         Econometrica, Vol. 21, no 4, October 1953, p. 503-546.
1979   Expected Utility Hypothesis and the Allais’ Paradox. Contemporary Discussions of
       Decisions under Uncertainty with Allais’ Rejoinder,
         Maurice Allais and Ole Hagen editors, Reidel Publishing Company, Dor-
       drecht, 1979, 714 p.
         Personal contributions:
         1. “Foreword” (p. 3-11)
         2. “The Foundations of a Positive Theory of Choice Involving Risk and a
       Criticism of the Postulates and Axioms of the American School” (p. 25-145).
         English translation of the 1952 memoir: “Fondements d’une théorie
       positive des choix comportant un risque et critique des postulats et axiomes
       de l’école américaine”
          3. “The So-called Allais’ Paradox and Rational Decisions under Uncertainty”
       (p. 434-698).
1984    The Foundations of the Theory of Utility and Risk
          in: “‘Progress in Decision Theory”, O. Hagen and F. Wenstop, editors, D.
        Reidel Publishing Company, Dordrecht, 1984, p. 3-131.
1984   Determination of Cardinal Utility According to an Intrinsic Invariant Model
         in: “Recent Development in the Foundations of Utility and Risk Theory”, p.
       83-120, L. Daboni and al. edit., (Proceedings of the 1984 Venice Confer-
       ence), D. Reidel Publishing Company, Dordrecht, 1986.
1985   Three Theorems on the Theory of Cardinal Utility and Random Choice
         in: “Essays in honour of Werner Leinfellner, Theory and Decision”, Gerald
       Heberlein and Hal Berghel, edit., p. 205-221, D. Reidel Publishing Com-
       pany, Dordrecht, 1987.
1985    The Allais Paradox
          The New Palgrave. A Dictionary of Economics, Vol. 1, p. 78-80, Macmillan,
        1987.
1986    The General Theory of Random Choices in Relation to the Invariant Cardinal
        Utility Function and the Specific Probability Function. The (U.θ) Model. A General
        Overview
          in: ‘Risk, Decision and Rationality”, Bertrand Munier, edit., D. Reidel
        Publishing Company, Dordrecht, 1987 p. 231-289.
1986   A New Neo-Bernoullian Theory: The Machina Theory - A Critical Analysis
         in: “Risk, Decision and Rationality”, Bertrand Munier, edit., D. Reidel
        Publishing Company, Dordrecht, 1987, p. 347-403.
1988   Cardinal Utility. History, Empirical Findings and Applications
         Fourth International Conference on the Foundations and Applications of Utility,
       Risk, and Decision Theory, Budapest, June 1988, Kluwer Publishing Com-
       pany, 1989.
1989   Scientific Papers on Risk and Utility Theory. Theory, Experience, and Applications
          Kluwer Publishing Company, 1.000 p.

Theory of Money, Credit, and Monetary Dynamics
1954    Les Fondements Comptables de la Macroéconomique - Les Equations Comptables
        entre Quantités Globales et leurs Applications (The Accounting Foundations of
       Macroeconomics - The Accounting Relations between Macroeconomic
       Quantities and their Applications)
         Presses Universitaires de France, Paris, 1954.


250                             Economic Sciences 1988

1954   Explication des Cycles Economiques par un Modèle non Linéaire à Regulation
       Retardée (Explanation of Economic Cycles by a non-linear Model with lagged
       Regulation)
         Metroeconomica, Vol. VIII, April 1956, fasc. 1, p. 4-83.
1955   Explication des Cycles Economiques par un Modèle non Linéaire à Régulation
       Retardée (Explanation of Economic Cycles by a non-linear Model with
       Lagged Regulation) - Part I: Revised version of the preceding paper; Part
       II: Supplementary paper.
          In the volume: “Les Modèles Dynamiques en Econométric”, Collection des
       Colloques Internationaux, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique,
       Vol. LXII, Paris, 1956, p. 259-308.
1965   Reformulation de la Théorie Quantitative de la Monnaie (A Restatement of the
       Quantity Theory of Money)
          Editions SEDEIS (205 Bld Saint Germain, Paris, 7è), in-4”, September
       1965, 186 p.
1965   Reformulation de la Théorie Quantitative de la Monnaie (A Restatement of the
       Quantity Theory of Money)
          Very abridged version of the preceding memoir
          Bulletin of the International Statistical Institute, Proceedings of the 35th
       Session, volume XLI, second issue, 1966, p. 905-947.
1966   A Restatement of the Quantity Theory of Money
          Very abridged English version of the 1965 memoir
          American Economic Review, Vol. LVI, n 5, December 1966, p. 1123-
                                                       o


       1156.
1968   Growth and Inflation
         American Bankers Association, Conference of University Monetary
       Economists, Ditchley Park, September 10-13th, 1968.
        Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, August 1969, p. 355-426 and 427-
       462.
1972   Forgetfulness and Interest
         Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, February 1972, p. 40-71.
1972   Le Concept de Monnaie, la Creation de Monnaie et de Pouvoir d’Achat par le
       Mécanisme du Credit et ses Implications (The Concept of Money, the Creation
       of Money and Purchasing Power through the Credit Mechanism and its
       Implications)
         in the volume: “Monnaie et Developpement”, vol. 4, p. 5-104, Ecole
       Nationale Supérieure des Mines (E.N.S.M.P.), Paris, 1975.
         Extracts have been published in: “Essais en l’honneur de Jean Marchal",
       Paris, Cujas, 1975, Vol. 2, La Monnaie, p. 106-145.
1974   The Psychological Rate of Interest
         Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, August 1974, p. 285-331.
1980   La Formulation Héréditaire et Relativiste de la Demande de Monnaie et du Taux
       d’Intérêt (The Hereditary and Relativistic Formulation of the Demand for
       Money and of the Rate of Interest)
          Conference and Seminar of May 5-6th, 1980, Department of Economet-
       rics of the University of Geneva.
          Reproduced in Allais, Fondements de l ‘Analyse Monétaire et Conjoncturelle; V,
       p. 105-177, E.N.S.M.P., 1980.
1984   The Credit Mechanism and its Implications
         in the volume: “Arrow and the Foundations of the Theory of Economic Policy”,
       George R. Feiwell, edit., p. 491-561, Macmillan Press, 1987, 758 p.
1984    A New Empirical Approach of the Hereditary and Relativistic Theory of the Demand
       for Money
          in: “Articole in Memoria di Tullio Bagiotti” A. Agnati, D. Cantarelli, and A.
        Montesano, edit., Rivista Internazionale di Scienze Economiche e Commer-
       ciali, Oct. - Nov. 1985, no’ 10-11, p. 905-948.


                                          M. Allais                                        251

1985     The Empirical Approaches of the Hereditary and Relativistic Theory of the Demand
        for Money
           Economia della Scelte Pubbliche, Journal of Public Finance and Public
        Choice (Fondazione Luigi Einaudi), 1986, p. 3-83.

Probability theory, and the analysis of time series and their exogenous components
1957      Test de Périodicité - Généralisation du Test de Schuster au car de Séries Tempo-
          relles Autocorrélées (Periodicity Test - A Generalization of Schuster’s Test to
        the Case of Autocorrelated Time Series)
           Comptes-Rendus de l’Académie des Sciences, Tome 244, May 13, 1957, n 20,
                                                                                       o


        p. 2469-2471.
1959    Test de Périodicité. Généralisation du Test du Schuster au cas de Séries Temporelles
        Autocorrélées (Periodicity Test - A Generalization of Schuster’s Test to the
        Case of Autocorrelated Time Series)
          Vol. 1 of the Studie in Onore di Corrado Gini, Istituto di Statistica della
        Facoltà di Scienze Statistische Demografiche ed Attuariali, p. 1-14.
1961    Généralisation du Test de Schuster au Cas de Séries Temporelles Autocorrélées dans
        l‘Hypothèse d’un Processus de Perturbations Aléatoires d’un Système Stable (A
        Generalization of Schuster’s Test to the Case of Autocorrelated Time Series
        in the Hypothesis of a Process of Random Perturbations within a Stable
        System)
           Memoir presented at the 33rd Conference of the International Statistical
        Institute, Paris, 1961, Bulletin de l’Institut International de Statistique, 1962,
        Tome 39, 2è livraison, p. 143-194.
1977    On the Concept of Probability
           Rivista Internazionale di Scienze Economiche e Commerciali, November
        1978, n o 11, p. 937-956.
1982    Frequency, Probability and Chance
          in the volume: “Foundations of Utility and Risk. Theory with Applications”,
        Bernt F. Stigum and Fred Wenstop, edit., D. Reidel Publishing Company,
        Dordrecht, 1983, p. 35-86.
1983    Sur la Distribution Normale des Valeurs à des Instants régulièrement Espacés d’une
        Somme de Sinusoides (On the Normal Distribution of Equally Spaced Values
        of a Sum of Sinusoidal Components)
          Paper presented to the Academy of Sciences, May 30, 1983, Comptes-
        Rendus de l’Académie des Sciences, Paris, Tome 296, Serie 1, p. 829-893.
1983    Fréquence, Probabilité, et Hasard (Frequency, Probability and Chance) with
        two Appendices:
          1. Fréquences empiriques et fréquences mathématiques - Illustration (Empirical
        Frequencies and Mathematical Frequencies - Illustration)
          2. Le Théorème (T) - La simulation du hasard par des fonctions presque
        périodiques (The (T) Theorem - Simulation of Chance by Almost Periodic
         Functions)
          Journal de la Societé de Statistique de Paris, 2è et 3è trimestres 1983, p. 70-
         102 and 144-221.
1987    Some Remarkable Properties of the Determination of a Continous Distribution by its
        Moments
          in the volume: “Risk, Decision and Rationality”, Bertrand Munier, edit., D.
         Reidel Publishing Company, 1987, p. 557-561.
1988    Phénomènes Aléatoires et Modèles Fréquentiels - Réalité et Théorie - Prolégo-
        mènes pour une Revision des Theories Admises (Random Phenomena and Fre-
        quential Models - Reality and Theory - Prolegomena for a Revision of
        Current Theories)
          Lecture of October 5th, 1988. Rheinisch-Westfälische Akademie der Wis-
        senschaften.


252                             Economic Sciences 1988

Overview of my scientific contributions
1978 Contributions à la Science Economique - Vue d’ensemble 1943-1978 (Contri-
       butions to Economic Science - General Overview 1943-1978)
          Centre d’Analyse Economique, Paris, 176 p.
1979   Sur mes Travaux 1943 - 1979 (On my Work 1943-1979)
          Centre d’Analyse Economique, Paris, 19 p.
1979   Discours prononcé le 13 Mars 1979 a l’occasion de la remise de la Medaille
       d’Or du Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique par Madame Alice
       Saunier-Seité, Ministre des Universités (Lecture given March 13th, 1979 on
       the occasion of receiving the Gold Medal of the National Centre of Scientific
       Research from Mrs Alice Saunier-Seité, Minister of Universities)
          Published in Revue d’Economie Politique, July-August 1979, p. 553-563.
1986   Principaux Ouvrages et Mémoires, 1943-1985 (Main Books and Memoirs,
       1943-1985)
          Centre d’Analyse Economique, Paris, 42 p.
1986   Essais en l‘honneur de Maurice Allais - Marchés, Capital et Incertitude (Essays in
       honour of Maurice Allais - Markets, Capital and Uncertainty)
          Economica, Paris, 1986, 265 p., Marcel Boiteux, Thierry de Montbrial,
       Bertrand Munier edit.
          Presentation by Marcel Boiteux, Thierry de Montbrial and Bertrand Mun-
       ier, p. 5 - 9; - L’rpuvre d'économiste de Maurice Allais, Achèvements théoriques et
       germes du renouveau (Maurice Allais, Economic Writings - Theoretical
       Achievements and Seeds of Renewal), Bertrand Munier, p. 13-37; -
       Maurice Allais, savant méconnu (Maurice Allais, An Unrecognized Scientist),
       Thierry de Montbrial, p. 39-44.
          A revised English translation of this book will be published by K l u w e r
       Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, in 1989, under the title: “Markets and Risk.
       Essays in Honour of Maurice Allais”.


MAIN REFERENCES
Complement to the references appended to my Nobel Lecture
Management and Economic Development
1946 Abondance ou Misère (Abundancy     or Misery)
       Paris, Librairie de Médicis, 1946, 120 p.
1947   Le Problème de la Planification Economique dans une Economie Collectiviste (The
       Problem of Economic Planning in a Collectivist Economy)
          Revue Internationale des Sciences Sociales Kyklos, July and October 1947, Vol.
       I, p. 254-280, and II, p. 48-71.
1961   L'Influence des Besoins Sur la Production des Biens de Consommution (The Influ-
       ence of Needs on the Production of Consumption Goods)
          In the collective volume: L’Evolution et le Rôle des Besoins de Biens de
       Consommation dans les Divers Régimes Economiques, Centre National de la
       Recherche Scientifique, Colloques Internationaux, Paris, 1963, p. 133-
       194.


1961   Le Tiers-Monde au Carrefour - Centralisation Autoritaire ou Planification Con-
       currentielle (The Third World at a Crossroad - Authoritarian Centralization
       or Competitive Planning)
          Les Cahiers Africains, Vols 7 and 8. Editions des Cahiers Africains, Bruxel-
       les (Creations de Presse, 34 Champs Elysees, Paris, VIIIè).

Income Distribution and Taxation
1947 Le Problème des Salaires (The Wages Question)
          C.E.G.O.S., 25è Cycles d ‘Etudes, Paris, November 1947, Fasc. I, p. 6-20.
1975 L’Imposition Généralisée des Plus-Values (Generalized Taxation of Capital
       Gains)
          Rapport de la Commission d’Etude d’une Imposition Généralisée des Plus-Values,
       La Documentation Francaise, Tome II, p. 5-24; and         Revue Administrative,
        November-December 1975, p. 563-570.
1976   Inflation, Répartition des Revenus et Indexation, avec reference à l’économie fran-
       çaise 1947-1975 (Inflation, Income Distribution, and Indexation, with Ref-
       erence to the French Economy 1947-1975)
          Economies et Sociétés, Tome X, n 4, 1976, p. 677-713.
                                              o


1976   L’Impôt sur le Capital et la Réforme Monétaire (Tax on Capital and the Monetary
       Reform)
          Editions Hermann, Paris, 370 p., second edition, 1988.
1979   La Lutte centre les Inegalités. Le Projet d’un Impôt Sur les Grosses Fortunes et la
       Réforme de la Fiscalité par l’Impôt sur le Capital (Fight against Inequalities -
       The Plan for a Wealth Tax and the Reform of the Tax System by the Tax on
       Capital)
         Rapport de la Commission d’Etude d’un Prélèvment sur les Fortunes, Vol. III,
       Opinions recueillies par la Commission, p. 17 -49.
         La Documentation Francaise, Paris, 1979.


Monetary Policy
1967 Les Conditions de l'Expansion dans la Stabilitié sur le Plan National (The Condi-
       tions of Growth in Stability on the National Framework)
          Revue d ‘Economie Politique, January-February 1967, n 1, p. 5-31.
                                                               o


1967 Growth without Inflation
         Center for Modern Economics, Rikkyo University, Tokyo, 1968, 86 p.
1974 L’Inflation Française et la Croissance - Mythologies et Réalité (French Inflation
      and Growth - Mythology and Reality)
         Conference on Inflation, December 18th, 1974, organized by the              Associ-
      ation pour la Liberte Economique et le Progrès Social (ALEPS), Paris, 1974,
      119p.
1987 Les Conditions Monétaires d’une Economic de Marches - De la Réflexion sur le
      Passé à la Préparation de l ‘Avenir (The Monetary Conditions of an Economy of
      Markets-From the Reflection on the Past to the Preparation of the Future)
         Montchrestien, 1989.

Comparative analysis of the Standards of Living and of Productivities
1956 Productivites, Niveaux de Vie et Rythmes de Croissance Compares en Russie Sovieti-
       que, aux Etats-Unis et en France (1880-1955) (Comparative Productivities,
        Standards of Living and Growth Rates, in Soviet Russia, The United States
        and France 1880-1955)
            Paper presented at the Academic des Sciences Morales et Politiques, April
        30th, 1956.
          Travaux de l’Académie des Sciences Morales et Politiques, 109è année, 4è serie,
        1956, p. 137-163.


228                             Economic Sciences 1988

International Trade and Economic Growth
1952 La Liberation des Echanges Commerciaux en Europe (The Easing of Restrictions
       on Trade in Europe)
          Paper presented to the Genoa International Economic Conference, Sep-
       tember 1952, Economia Internazionale, Vol. VI, 1953, no l-2, p. l-37.
1961   La Politique de l'Occident vis-à-vis du Tiers Monde (The Policy of the West
       towards the Third World)
          Paper presented at the Académie des Sciences Morales et Politiques, May 15th,
       1961.
         Revue des Travaux de l’Académie des Sciences Morales et Politiques, 1961, p.
       227-249.
1961   Un Paradoxe de la Theorie du Commerce International (A Paradox of the Theory
       of International Trade)
          Published in the collective volume in honour of Professor Johan Akerman,
       Money, Growth and Methodology, edit. by Hugo Hegeland, March 31 th, 1961,
       Lund, Sweden  , Social Science Studies, n o 20, C.W.K. Gleerup Publishers, p.
       337-350.
1970   La Libéralisation des Relations Economiques Internationales - Accords Commer-
       ciaux ou Integrution Economique (The Liberalization of International Econom-
       ic Relations-Trade Agreement or Economic Integration)
          Gauthier-Villars, Paris, 1971, 195 p.
1970   Customs Unions and Trade Agreement
         Encyclopaedia Britannica, (1974 edition), Vol. V, p. 376-385.

International Monetary System
1965 Un Plan pour la Reforme du Systeme Monetaire International (A Plan for the
       Reform of the International Monetary System)
         Il Politico, Université de Pavie, 1965, Anno XXX, n 4, December 1965, p.
                                                                o


       741-749.
                                         :
         Published in the collective volume   Inflation et Ordre Monéaire International,
       Schweizerisches Institut für Auslandsforschung, Publications de l’Institut
       Universitaire de Hautes Etudes Internationales, n° 46, Geneva, 1967, p.
       123-131.
1966 Growth without Inflation
        Il Politico, University of Pavia, 1967, Anno XXXII, n 2, p. 348-354.
                                                              o


1966 Caractéristiques Comparées des Systèmes de l ‘Etalon Or, des Changes à Parités
       Libres, et de l’Etalon de Change Or
         In the collective volume in honour of Jacques Rueff :      Les Fondements
       Philosophiques des Systèmes Economiques, Paris, Payot, 1966, p. 356-372.
1967   The Monetary Reform: A Synthesis
         In: Monetary Reform and the Price of Gold, Randall Hinshaw, Editor , Johns
       Hopkins Press, Baltimore, p. 134-138.
1968   Some Data Concerning the International Monetary System
         In: On International Monetary Order - Agenda by a Group of Monetary Experts,
       Graduate Institute of International Studies, Geneva, 1968, p. 14-18.

Economic Unions and Federal Unions
1947 Aspects Economiques du Fédéralisme (Economic Aspects of Federalism)
          Report presented at the Montreux Conference of the European Union of the
       Federalists, August 27 - 31 th, 1947.
          Published in the collective volume:   Rapport du Premier Congrès Annuel de
       l'Union Européenne des Fédéralistes, Union Européenne des Fédéralistes, Palais
       Wilson, Geneva, p. 33-57.
1949   Productivités Salaires Réels et Union Economique (Productivities, Real Wages
       and Economic Union)
         Economia Internazionale, Vol. II, n 3, August 1949, p. 615-629.
                                               o


                                          M. Allais                                    229


1950   Les Interets des Groupes Sociaux et Nationaux et l’Union Economique de l’Europe
       (The Interests of the Social and National Groups and the Economic Union of
       Europe)
         Economia Internazionale, Vol. IV, n 1, February 1951, p. 1-14.
                                              o


1951   L’Union Politique, Condition Première de toute Union Economique (Political
       Union, Prerequisite of Any Economic Union)
         Bulletin de la Chambre de Commerce des Provinces de Liège, March-April
       1952, p. 7-8 and 7-9.
1956   La Politique Economique Atlantique (The Atlantic Economic Policy)
        Report presented at the Conseil National du Mouvement pour l’Union Atlanti-
       que, November 1956.
         Revue Politique et Parlementaire, 59è année, n 664, January 1957, p. 17-
                                                         o


       27.
1957   Le Système des Prix et de la Concurrence dans le Marché Commun de la Commu-
       nauté Européenne du Charbon et de l’Acier (The Price System and Competition
      in Common Market of the Coal and Steel European Community)
                                       s
         Report presented at the Con grès     International d’Etudes sur la Communauté
      Européenne du Charbon et de l‘Acier de Stresa (June 1957 ), Actes Officiels du
      Congrès, 1957, Vol. VI, p. 143-210, Editions Guiffré, Milan, 1958 (See also
      Vol. V, p. 277-284; Vol. VI p. 521-526 and 587-594)
1957 Un Marché Commun Atlantique est-il, ou non, une Utopie? (An Atlantic Common
      Market, is, or not, an Utopia?)
     Report published at the Conférence         Internationale sur la Communauté Atlanti-
      que of Bruges, September 9-14th, 1957       . Les Cahiers de Bruges, 1957, III-
      IV, p. 26-31 and:
        Revue Politique et Parlementaire, 59th year, Tome 223, October 1957, p.
      111-118.
1958 Fondements Théoriques, Perspectives et Conditions d’un Marché Commun Effectif
      (Theoretical Foundations, Perspectives and Conditions of a Real Common
      Market)
        Special issue devoted to the Common Market     ,      Revue d’Economie Politique,
      68th year, January-February 1958, p. 56-99.
1959 L’Europe Unie, Route de la Prospérité (United Europe, Road of Prosperity)
        Calmann-Levy, Paris, 1959, 369 p.
1964 Toward an Integrated Atlantic Community
         Report presented at the Conference on the organization of the North
      Atlantic Treaty, The Center of Strategic Studies, Georgetown University, Wash-
      ington, May 1964.
        Published in the collective volume  :      Nato in Quest of Cohesion, Hoover
      Institutions Publications, Praeger, 1965, p. 359-386.
        The French version was published under the: title L’Avenir de la Commu-
       nauté Atlantique
         Bulletin SEDEIS, Collection Futuribles, n 85, November 1964, 52 p.
                                                    o


1984   Contribution à la Table Ronde sur les Contraintes Economiques Extéieures (Contri-
       bution to the Round Table on the External Economic Constraints) organized
       by the Annales des Mines
         Annales des Mines, March 1984, p. 7-9, 15-19 and 27-29.

The Economy of Energy
1949 La Gestion des Houillères Nationalisées et la Théorie Economique (The Manage-
        ment of the Nationalized Coal Mines and Economic Theory)
          Study made for the Charbonnages de France in 1949, Imprimerie Nationale,
        Paris, 1953, 126 p. in-4°.
1960    Les Aspects Essentiels de la Politique de l'Energie (The Essential Features of the
        Energy Policy)
          Paris, Imprimerie Nationale, 1961, 74 p.


230                                Economic Sciences 1988

The Economy of Transports
1947 Le Problème de la Coordination des Transports et la Théorie Economique (The
          Question of the Coordination of Transports and the Economic Theory)
           Study made in 1946-1947 at the request of the Ministère de la Reconstruc-
          tion et de l'Urbanisme
             Revue d’Economie Politique, March-April 1948, p. 212-271.
1964      Options de la Politique Tarifaire dans les Transports (Options of the Transports
          Tariff Policy)
             (In collaboration with Messrs del Viscovo, Duquesne de la Vinelle, Oort,
          and Seidenfus)
             Etudes, Series Transports, no 1, 206 p., Travaux du Comite d’Experts pour
          l'Etude des Options de la Politique Tarfaire dans les Transports (October 1963 -
          November 1964), Communauté Economique Européenne, Bruxelles, 1965.
             Translations in German, Italian, Dutch and English of this volume were
          also published in 1965 by the European Economic Community.
1964      La Théorie Economique et la Tarification Optimum de l'Usage des Infrastructures de
          Transport (Economic Theory and the Optimum Tariffication of the Use of the
          Transport Infrastructures)
                                                 :
            Study published in the collective volume Les Transports, Société Amicale
          des Anciens Elèves de l’Ecole Polytechnique, 1964, p. 108-114.
1964 Programme d’Investissement et d’Exploitation Optimum d’une Infrastructure de
       Transport (Optimum Investment and Exploitation Program of a Transport
      Infrastructure)
         Study published in the collective volume in honour of Professor J. L. Meij:
      Bedrijfseconomische Verkenningen, G. Delwel, The Hague, 1965, p. 199-238,
      and:
         Automobilismo e Automobilismo Industriale, Review of the International
      Automobile Federation, July-August 1965, no 4, p. 447-493.
1988 L’Economie des Infrastructures de Transport et les Fondements du Calcul Economi-
      que (The Economy of Transport Infrastructures and the Foundations of
      Economic Calculus)
         Revue d’Economie Politique, 1989, n 2, p. 159. 203.
                                              o




The Economy of Mining Research
1954 Evaluation des Perspectives Economiques de la Recherche Minière sur de Grands
       Espaces - Application au Sahara Algérien
         Study made for the Bureau de Recherches Minières de l'Algérie (1953-1954)
             Memoir presented at the Petropolis (Brazil) Conference of the Interna-
          tional Statistical Institute and at the Centenary Conference of Mineral Indus-
          try, Paris, June 1955.
             Bulletin de l’Institut International de Statistique, Tome XXXV, 4, Rio de
          Janeiro, 1957, p. 89-140, and:
             Revue de l'Industrie Minérale, Paris, January 1956, p. 329-383.
             English translation:
            Method of Appraising Economic Prospects of Mining Exploration over Large
          Territories - Algerian Sahara Case Study
            Management Science, Vol. 3, n 4, July 1957.
                                           o


             A more complete edition was published in one volume under the same
          title: Evaluation des Perspectives Economiques de la Recherche Minière sur de
          Grands Espaces - Application au Sahara Algérien, by the Bureau de Recherche
          Minière de l’Algérie, Alger, 1957, 101 p.

History   of Economic Thought
1964      Walras, Pionnier de l’Economie Mathématique et Réformateur méconnu (Walras,
          Pioneer of Mathematical Economy and Unrecognized Reformer)


                                          M. Allais                                    231

          Booklet, for the Centenary of the Association Amicale des Anciens Elèves de
       l’Ecole Nationale Supérieure des Mines de Paris (1864-1964), p. 26-29.
1967   Pareto. Contributions to Economics
          International Encyclopaedia of the Social Sciences, MacMillan and Free Press,
       1968, Vol. II, p. 399-411.
1967 Irving Fisher
         International Encyclopaedia   of the Social Sciences, MacMillan and Free Press,
       1968, Vol. 5, p. 475-485.
1985   La Théorie des Choix dans l'CEuvre de Rene Roy. Une Analyse Critique (The
       Choice Theory in the Work of Rene Roy. A Critical Analysis)
        Revue d’Economie Politique, 1988, n o 3, p. 315-357.


Scientific Research, Methodology and Education
1954 Puissance et Dangers de l’Outil Mathématique en Economique (Power and Dan-
       gers of the Mathematical Tool in Economics)
          Econometrica, Vol. 22, n 1, January 1954, p. 58-71.
                                    o


1966   L’Economique en tant que Science (Economics as a Science)
          Lecture given at the opening session of the academic year 1967 - 1968 of
       the Institut Universitaire de Hautes Etudes Internationales of Geneva, October
       23th, 1967. Collection des Etudes et Travaux de l’Institut Universitaire de Hautes
       Etudes Internationales, nD 6, 26 p.
          Reproduced in the Revue d’Economie Politique, January 1968, p. 5-30.
          English translation: Economics as a Science, Collection des Etudes et Travaux de
       l’Institut Universitaire de Hautes Etudes Internationales, n 7, 24 p. and Cahiers
                                                                     o


       Vilfredo Pareto, 1968, p. 5-24.


Sociology and Political Science
1945 Prolégomènes à la Reconstruction Economique du Monde (Prolegomena for the
       World Economic Reconstruction)
        Paris, Sirey, 1945, 39 p. in-8°.
1946   Quelques Réflexions sur l’Inégalité, les Classes et la Promotion Sociale (Some
       Reflections on Inequality, Classes and Social Promotion)
          Economie et Humanisme, July-August and September-October 1946, p.
       357-374 and p. 484-499.
1948   Au-delà du Laisser-Fairisme et du Totalitarisme (Beyond Laissez-Fairism and
       Totalitarianism)
          Report presented at the Conference of Europe in the Hague, May 1948.
          Nouvelle Revue d’Economie Contemporaine, April 1950, p. 25-32, and May
       1950, p. 26-32.
1950   Quelques Réflexions sur la Démocratie et le Totalitarisme (Some Reflections on
       Democracy and Totalitarianism)
          Revue d’Economie Contemporaine, December 1950 and January 1951, p. 8-
       17 and 7-17.
1951   Intéret General et Intérêts Particuliers (Common Good and Particular Interests)
          Nouvelle Revue d’Economie Contemporaine, February 1951, p. 13-18.
1951   Le Problème des Partis Totalitaires et le Destin de la Démocratie (The Question of
       the Totalitarian Parties and the Fate of Democracy)
          Nouvelle Revue d’Economie Contemporaine, June 1951, p. 6-12.
1951   Le Quatrième Pouvoir et la Démocratie (The Fourth Power and Democracy)
          Nouvelle Revue d ‘Economic Contemporaine, October 195 1, p. 4-11.
1952   Quelques Réflexions sur la Contrainte et la Liberté (Some Reflections on Con-
       straint and Liberty)
          Revue Francaise de Science Politique, Vol. II, n 2, April-June 1952, p.
                                                                o


       336-373.


232                                   Economic Sciences 1988

1959   Les Conditions Economiques d’une Société Libre (The Economic Conditions of a
       Free Society)
          Revue des Trauaux de l ‘Académie des Sciences Morales et Politiques, 112th year,
       1959, p. 37-51.
1969   La Société Libérale en Péril (The Liberal Society in Peril)
         Societe Amicale des Anciens Elèves de l’Ecole Polytechnique ,      La Jaune et la
       Rouge, n 241, October 1969, p. 3-25.
                 o


1969   Classes Sociales et Civilisations (Social Classes and Civilizations)
         Economies et Sociétés, Cahiers de l’Institut de Sciences Economiques et
       Appliquées (serie 43, no 17), 1974, p. 285-377.
1969   Inégalités Civilisations (Inequality and Civilizations)
         Published in the collective volume :   Mélanges en l’honneur de Raymond Aron;
       Science et Conscience de la Société, Calmann-Levy, Paris, 1971, Tome II, p. 71 -
       97.
         English translation: Inequality and Civilizations
         Social Science Quarterly, September 1973. Special issue for the 50th anni-
       versary of Pareto’s death.

Theoretical and Experimental Physics
1957 - 1959 Anomalies des Mouuements du Pendule Paraconique (Anomalies of the
       Movement of the Paraconical Pendulum)
          Comptes-rendus des Seances de l’Academie des Sciences. Seances des 13,
       et 15 Novembre: 4, 16, et 23 Decembre 1957; 3 Novembre et 22 Decembre
       1958; 19 Janvier et 9 Fevrier 1959 (Tome 245, p. 1697-l 700, 1875-
       1 8 7 8 , 2 0 0 1 - 2 0 0 3 , 2 1 7 0 - 2 1 7 3 , 2 4 6 7 - 2 4 7 0 ; T o m e 2 4 7 , p . 1 4 2 8-
       1431; et 2284-2287; Tome 248, p. 359-362 et 764-767).
1958   Doit-on reconsidérer les Lois de la Gravitation? (Should the Laws of Gravitation
       be Reconsidered?)
          Perspectives X (Ecole Polytechnique), p. 90-104.
1959   Should the Laws     of Gravitation be Reconsidered?
           Aero-Space Engineering, September 1959, no 9, p. 46-52; October 1959,
       n o 10, p. 51-55; November 1959, no 11, p. 55.
1959   Mouvements du Pendule Paraconique et Eclipse Totale de Soleil du 2 Octobre 1959
       (Movement of the Paraconical Pendulum and Total Eclipse of the Sun of
       October 2nd, 1959)
         Institut de Recherche de la Sidérurgie, November 10th, 1959, 7 p.
1960   Existence de Composantes Périodiques dans les Variations des Lectures Correspon-
       dant aux Visées Effectuées avec une Lunette Fixe sur une Mire Fixe en Liaison avec
       les Mouvements du Pendule Paraconique (Existence of Periodic Components in
       the Changes of the Readings Corresponding to the Sightings on a Fixed
       Sighting Mark through a Fixed Telescope in Relationship with the Movement
       of the Paraconical Pendulum)
         Institut de Recherche de la Sidérurgie, February 23rd, 1960, 6 p.

Overview of my Work
1988 My Life Philosophy (with an Appendix     : On my Physical Experiments 1952 -
       1960)
          The American Economist, 1989
                       : La Philosophic de ma Vie (avec un Appendice
          French version                                              : Sur mes
       Expériences de Physique I952-1960)
          Revue d’Economie Politique, n 1, J anuary-February 1989, p. 28-54.
                                       o
