DERIVATIVES  IN A DYNAMIC ENVIRONMENT

Nobel Lecture, December 9, 1997
by
MORON  S.  SCHOLES

Graduate  School  of  Business,  Stanford  University,  Stanford,  CA,  USA  and Long-Term  Capital 
 Management,  L.P.,  One   East Weaver  Street,  Greenwich, CT 06851-5146,  USA


1. INTRODUCTION*
The  trading  of financial  derivatives  on organized  exchanges  has exploded since the early 
1970s. The trading of off-exchange financial derivatives on the so-called  “Over-the-Counter” or 
“OTC” market has exploded since the mid- 1980s. Academic and applied research on financial 
derivatives, which was in- itiated by the Black-Scholes  and Merton option-pricing research in the 
late 1960s and early 1970s, also has exploded. As a result, three industries have blossomed: an 
exchange industry in derivatives, an OTC industry in synthetic products,  and  an  academic  
industry  in  derivative  research,  populated  by scientists in and out of academic institutions. 
The academic industry has seen a growth of research and course offerings in economics and business 
schools in the areas of options, futures, risk management, financial engineering, and by marrying 
institutional  and derivative  modeling, a richer approach  to fi- nancial intermediation and 
innovation under uncertainty. In addition, busi- ness schools  and  economics  departments  have  
competition  from  new  re- search and courses in mathematics departments and engineering schools 
in the  mathematics  of derivative  pricing  and alternative  stochastic  processes, and in law 
schools in understanding contracting under uncertainty.
The academic  industry has produced  myriad  innovative  research  papers following the fundamental 
insights of Black and Scholes (1973) and Merton (1973) . The Chicago Board of Trade and Chicago 
Mercantile Exchange ini- tiated the exchange industry by developing financial options and futures 
con- tracts on securities; they have spawned the growth of many new derivative ex- changes  around  
the  world.  The  first  was  the  Chicago  Board  of  Trade's sponsorship  of  the  Chicago  Board 
 Options  Exchange  in 1973.  Moreover, some exchanges such as the Options Market in Stockholm have 
transported the technology used to trade derivatives to other markets in Europe and Asia.

I would  like  to  thank  Robert C. Merton for  many years of fruitful and  exciting discussions on 
these  topics. In addition, I would like to thank my many colleagues at the University of Chicago, 
MIT,  and  Stanford  University,  for  their  ideas and  stimulating  discussions.   Most  
important  has been  the  support and involvement  of  Merton  H. Miller  in  my career: I owe  him 
 a  tremendous debt and cherish  his friendship.  I miss Fischer  Black; I miss  his friendship,  
his insights,  and  his good  humor.

T28                                        Economic  Sciences  199'7

These  exchanges  succeed  by  producing  the  derivative  contracts  that  add value for 
individuals and institutions around the world. The OTC industry, which  has  grown  to prominence  
since  the  mid-1980s,  first  in  the  United States and now in every corner of the globe, is now 
larger in size than the ex- change industry. Financial institutions in the OTC industry offer 
customized derivative products to meet the specific needs of each of their clients; the ex- change 
industry offers standardized products to reach a richer cross-section of demand.
Each  industry  requires original  research  to understand  the  pricing  and production  costs of 
the products  and financial  services  that they bring  to their clients. Derivative research is 
quickly transferred to practice; moreover, practice  stimulates  both academic  and applied 
research. Some of the best research  is conducted outside of academic institutions  and academics 
have found a home in each of the three industries. Graduates from mathematics, computer  sciences,  
engineering  and  physics  compete  and  cooperate  with those trained in financial economics for 
research and structuring positions in both the exchange and OTC industry.
It is difficult to define financial derivatives in a dynamic environment. The purest among us might 
argue that any security is a derivative if its price dyna- mics depend on the dynamics of some 
other underlying  asset or assets and time. This broad definition allows not only for what 
currently exists but also what  new  derivative  instruments  will  be  developed  in  the  future  
with  en- hanced understanding  and changing  production  costs. The popular press, however, tends 
to limit the definition to include financial options, futures and forward  contracts either  traded 
on an exchange  or issued in the OTC in- dustry. In the future they may come to be called financial 
products.
The will of Alfred Nobel states, in part, that the Nobel Prize shall be award- ed for an “important 
discovery or invention.” Fischer Black's and my discov- ery was how to price options and to provide 
a way to manage risk. Robert Merton developed an important alternative proof of the pricing 
technology and extended the approach in many directions including how to price op- tions with 
dividends, how to price options when the interest rate is not con- stant, and how to apply a more 
general structure to price many other con- tingent contracts.
Black and Scholes have over the years been accused of inventing deriva- tives, at least those 
derivative products that have been claimed  to have had bad economic consequences for their users. 
It is seldom remembered  that these contracts have two sides: if a buyer loses, the ultimate seller 
might gain. Only if losses cause dead-weight costs is there a net loss to society. It is said that 
“every successful idea has a thousand fathers, and every failure is an or- phan.” Over the years we 
have been granted both distinctions. We did not, however, invent derivatives. Options existed in 
many financial contracts prior to the Black-Scholes and Merton pricing technologies. Options were 
noted to have been traded on the Amsterdam Stock Exchange in the late 17a century and traded on the 
Chicago Board of Trade into the early 1930s. As described in Cootner (1964) , research in option 
pricing goes back as far as Bachelier's

Myron  A.  Scholes                                                 129

Ph.D. thesis in 1900. Although they are not generally thought of as options, myriad securities and 
investment decisions have been made in the past and are being made currently  that could be 
evaluated  using  the Black-Scholes technology. The technology was an invention that facilitated 
multiple inven- tions in each of the three industries. What I did not realize at the time of the 
invention was how the technology would evolve and how it would be used to produce  new types of 
securities with imbedded  options at lower cost than could be accomplished prior to the development 
of the technology. This en- hanced the efficiency set of demanders and suppliers of capital, not 
only in the United States but also around the world.
With the Christmas season approaching at these Nobel award ceremonies in Stockholm,  I  will invoke 
 the  “Past,”  the  “Present” and  the  “Future,”  as Charles Dickens  did in  “A Christmas  
Carol,”  to describe  the evolution  of derivatives in a dynamic environment. I do not mean to draw 
too fine a pa- rallel,  however.  That  is, I  am  not  implying  that  through  the  eyes  of Mr. 
Scrooge the past for derivatives was bright with hope and innocence, and the present is dark and 
foreboding and the future, without changing our ways, presents a bleak picture. On the contrary, 
many in academics and those in practice have often asked for a glimpse of the past; that is, how we 
developed the technology and the model, and the past gives insights into the present. It was a time 
of innocence. It was a time of discovery. It is a tradition at these Nobel award ceremony lectures 
to describe the age of innocence. I am hono- red and thank the Nobel Prize Committee for this 
wonderful opportunity do so. I wish that Fischer Black were alive today to share this honor with 
us.
Twenty-five  years is a tender age for the new academic  and the new ex- change industry. Fifteen 
years is still a young age for the new OTC industry. The Present, which I date from the late 1980s 
to current time, shows an in- dustry that has experienced growing pains, and many, including 
regulators, are worried that it still has not come of age. And, will the Future be bleak? No, there 
will be failures, but the industries will thrive because derivative in- struments will provide 
progressively lower-cost solutions to investor and entity problems than will competing 
alternatives. These lower-cost solutions will in- volve the unbundling and repackaging of coarse 
financial products into their constituent  parts  to  satisfy  client  demands.  The  process  will 
 continue  to evolve as advances in information technology drive down the cost of provid- ing 
alternative and more productive solutions.

2. THE PAST
Although Black (1989) and Bernstein (1992) described their versions of the development  of  the  
option-pricing  technology,  this  lecture,  however,  gives me  an  opportunity  to  add  to  
their  description  through  my  recollection  of things  past.  My formal  training at  the 
University of Chicago was in financial economics,  statistics  and   economics.  At  Chicago,  
Merton  Miller,  the  1990 Nobel  laureate,  and  Eugene  Fama,  a  prolific  scholar,  stimulated  
my excite- ment  in  economics  and  a new branch  of economics,  which  has come  to be

130                               Economic  Sciences  1997

called financial economics. I also owe a similar and considerable debt to my fellow classmates at 
Chicago, most notably, Jack Gould, Michael Jensen and Richard Roll.
The three strands of financial economics that most set the tone for my fu- ture research were 
arbitrage and the notion of substitutes; the efficient mar- kets hypothesis;  and the capital asset 
pricing model.'  These strands gave a mathematical basis to the models of finance, in a general 
equilibrium frame- work.  Modigliani   and   Miller   (see   Miller   (1988)   for  a  
retrospective) were making profound  breakthroughs  that provided a general equilibrium model for 
corporate finance. Their arbitrage arguments, which demonstrat- ed how a hrm’s value was 
independent of how it financed its activities, had a profound effect on the way I analyze and model 
many problems in econom- ics. The Fama  (1965)  and samuelson  (1965b)  efficient-markets 
hypothesis that states that, in a well-functioning capital market, the dynamics of asset pri- ces 
are described by a submartingale and that the best estimate of the value of a security is today's 
price, was revolutionary to economics. Their insights gave me an important framework to think about 
the dynamics of asset prices and how markets adjust to “news.” It set the stage for empirical 
testing of how in- formation was incorporated into security prices and gave me a vehicle to ap- ply 
my statistics  and computer  skills in a financial  economics  context. For example,  Jensen  
(1968)  had  used  the  concepts  of  the  efficient-markets hypothesis to test whether mutual 
funds, which were professionally managed and spent considerable sums of money to discover 
undervalued assets, could outperform  randomly-selected  investments  on  a  risk-adjusted  basis.  
Roll (1970) had tested the efficiency of the bond market controlling for changes in expected  
returns  impounded  in bond prices. In my own work, Scholes (1972) , I used the concepts of 
efficient markets and substitutes (arbitrage) to test the extent to which security prices were 
influenced by the size of the sales of large blocks of securities or by changes in the information 
set. Following on  the  work  of  Markowitz  (1952, 1959) , the  Sharpe  (1964) , and  Lintner 
(1965) the capital asset pricing model provided a general equilibrium model of asset prices under 
uncertainty.  This became  the fundamental  model for measuring the risk of a security. It was 
elegant to condense the required rela- tive rates of return on securities into a simple 
reduced-form equation that de- pended only on their “betas,” a measure of their relative 
contribution to the risk of the optimal portfoiio.
The  capital  structure  models,  the  efficient-markets hypothesis,  and  the
capital asset pricing model had the common central themes of arbitrage and market equilibrium: 
securities with similar economic risk had to exhibit simi- lar returns to prevent arbitrage 
profits. This principle applies to all securities, whether they are common stock, bonds, or hybrid 
instruments. Through par- ticipation  in seminar  presentations  at the University  of Chicago,  I 
became

I  I am sure that Fischer Black would pick at least the efficient-markets hypothesis and the capi- 
tal  asset  pricing  model  as  most  influential  in  the  development  of  his  thinking  in  
financial economics.

Myron  A.  Scholes                                               131

generally aware of the nature of warrants and convertible bonds. I was una- ware, however, of the 
interest in warrant pricing and the research  that had been conducted at MIT on this topic in the 
1960s even though I became an Assistant Professor at the Sloan School of Management at MIT in 1968.
I did not meet Robert Merton until the spring of 1969, when he was inter- viewing for a position at 
the Sloan School. We began interacting in the fall of 1969. We talked then about his current 
research on dynamic applications of the capital asset pricing model with changing opportunity sets 
and my work, at the time, including tests of the capital asset pricing model. We did not talk about 
warrant pricing even though Fischer Black and I were working on the problem. I guess we did not 
appreciate that each of us had an interest in this research area.
In  the  summer  of 1968,  a  research  project  at Wells Fargo  Bank  in  San Francisco convinced  
me that the passive  management  of assets could be a viable contender to actively managed 
portfolios. In my report to Wells Fargo Bank, I recommended that they initiate passive investment 
strategies and of- fer them to their clients, the forerunner to so-called “index funds.” That fall, 
on the suggestion of MichaelJensen, I had lunch with Fischer Black, who he had met because 
ofJensen's research on mutual funds. Fischer was employed at Arthur  D. Little, a consulting  firm 
in Cambridge,  Mass. We had several other lunches that fall and Fischer suggested that he was 
thinking of leaving Arthur D. Little to start his own consulting firm. At about the same time, John 
McQuown at Wells Fargo Bank asked whether I wanted to conduct research that would describe the 
tradeoff of risk and return in the market as a fore- runner to introducing passive investment 
strategies to their clients. Without research,  they were not willing  to offer index-fund-like 
products to clients. Being an Assistant Professor, I was restricted as to the number of days I 
could consult. I asked Fischer whether he wanted to join forces on the project. It was obvious from 
our lunch discussions that he had very similar ideas, and was starting a research project with 
Jeflsen on measuring risk and return. We
joined forces and worked together to test the capital asset pricing model (see
Black, Jensen and Scholes (1972) ). We developed  the concept of the zero- beta portfolio to test 
the model. If we could create a zero beta-minimum vari- ance  portfolio  by buying  low beta stocks 
and  selling  high  beta  stocks and achieve  realized  returns  on  this portfolio  that  were  
significantly  different from the interest rate this would violate the predictions of the original 
capital asset pricing model.
In  the  winter  of 1969,  I  agreed  to direct  the  Masters  thesis  of an  MIT graduate student 
who had garnered a time series of warrant and underlying stock prices and wanted to apply the 
capital asset pricing model to value the warrants. I read all of the articles relating to warrant 
pricing in Paul Cootners’ book of readings on The Random Character of Stock Prices (1964) . One in- 
cluded paper, by Case Sprenkle and dated 1960, seemed the most relevant to me, but Sprenkle used an 
exogenously determined discount rate to discount the expected terminal value of the warrant to its 
present value.
What seemed apparent was that the expected return of the warrant could

132                                        Economic  Sciences  1997

not be constant for each time period because the risk of the warrant changed with changes in the 
stock price and with changes in time to maturity. For ex- ample,  if the warrant  was far  
“in-the-money,” that is, the underlying  stock price was far above the exercise price, and the 
warrant was almost sure to be exercised, its price would change almost dollar for dollar with a 
change in the underlying stock price. The percentage change in the value of the warrant, however, 
would be greater  than the percentage  change in the value of the common stock because the warrant 
was a leveraged instrument. On the other hand,  if  the  warrant  was  “out-of-the-money,”  that 
is,  the  underlying  stock price was less than the exercise price, the warrant price would move 
far less than dollar for dollar with the price of the common stock (for example, $.5 for $1 move in 
the common) . The percentage change in the price of the war- rant, however, would be even greater 
than that of the in-the-money warrant.
As a result, the expected return on the warrant could not be constant each period if the beta of  
the stock was constant each period. I  thought  about using the capital asset pricing model to 
establish a zero-beta portfolio of com- mon stock and warrants by selling enough shares of common 
stock per each warrant held each period to create a zero-beta portfolio. Given I could create a 
zero-beta portfolio, the expected return on the net investment in this port- folio would be equal 
to the riskless rate of interest. I knew that I would have to change  the number  of shares  of 
stock each  period to retain  my zero-beta portfolio. But, after working on this concept, off and 
on, I still couldn't figure out analytically how many shares of stock to sell short to create a 
zero-beta portfolio.
Fischer and I continued working on tests of the capital asset pricing model and the development of 
investment products based on the implications of our research throughout 1969. In the summer or 
early fall of 1969, I discus- sed with Fischer my earlier experience with warrants, my attempt at 
creating the zero-beta portfolio, and my inability to determine the changing number of shares 
needed each period to create the zero-beta portfolio. He described to me his research on warrants 
and that he was frustrated in his inability to progress further than he had to that time. He showed 
me a sheet of paper, which described the relation between the return on the warrant and the un- 
derlying stock. Following on earlier work by Jack Tremor, Fischer had used a Taylor Series 
expansion  of w(x,t) , where “w” is the warrant price, “x” is the current stock price and “t” is 
time to maturity to show the relation between the change in the warrant price as a function of the 
change in the price of the common stock and a decrease in the time to maturity of the option. 
Ignoring terms of second order with regard to time, over a short period of time, this expansion 
was:



where A is the change symbol, and the subscripts refer to partial derivatives
with respect to the first or second arguments.
Not  surprisingly,  Fischer  had  used  the  capital  asset  pricing  model  to  de-

Myron  A.  Scholes                                               133
scribe the relation between the expected return on the warrant and the mark- et  and  the  expected 
 return  on  the  common  stock  and  the  market.  By substituting for the change in the warrant 
price as a function of changes in the stock price and time in the capital asset pricing relation, 
it became ob- vious on how to create a zero-beta portfolio that would have an expected rate of 
return equal to the interest rate (for we assumed a constant interest rate). Consider the returns 
over a very short period of time on two alternative in- vestment strategies:  under  (1), we 
acquire  the warrant, and enough bonds earning at interest, r, per period, such that our investment 
in strategy (1)  is the same as in alternative strategy (2) , in which we buy w, of stock. The fol-
lowing is the investment and the return on these two alternative strategies:


Investment
(1)   Buy warrant     w Bonds               w   x — w
(2)   Buy Stock         wl  x

Return
+ W2  t + '/, wk, Ax* At
r At(wi   x — w) w  Air

The investment was constructed  to be the same in strategy (1)  and strategy
(2) . The risk appears to be the same in both strategies. The only uncertain term is dx, the change 
in the stock price, and the total uncertainty  due to changes in the stock  price is the same  in 
both strategies.  fix* involves  the change in the stock price squared, a form of variance, which 
as At becomes small approaches x2O2, the stock price squared times the instantaneous vari- ance of 
the underlying returns on the common stock, which is assumed to be constant.
Since the risk is the same and the investment is the same under both strate- gies, to prevent 
arbitrage, the returns must be the same over a short period of time. After equating the returns on 
strategy (1)  with the returns on strategy
(2), and substituting for dx*, we find:



This is the Black-Scholes differential equation. The initial condition for a war- rant or call 
option is that w(x,t*)  = Max(x - c, 0), where t* is the maturity date of the option, and c is the 
exercise price of the option. The only requir- ed inputs to value the option, other than its 
initial conditions, are r, the in- terest rate, and o°, the variance rate per unit time on the 
returns on the un- derlying stock. We were both amazed that the expected rate of return on the 
underlying stock did not appear in the differential equation.
Although the number of shares needed to create a zero-beta portfolio each
period was w, it was not obvious to us how to find wl. The next step in solving the problem was to 
realize that since the warrant valuation depended only on the variability of returns and not the 
expected return on the underlying com- mon stock, it was arbitrary what expected return was assumed 
for the under-
lying common stock. The same warrant valuation equation would result be- cause we had hedged out 
the risk of the common stock in establishing  the

134                               Economic  Sciences  1997

zero-beta  portfolio  or  the  alternative  replicating  portfolio,  as above.  We  as- sumed  that 
the expected return on the common stock was equal to the inter- est  rate  over  the  next  short  
period  of  time,  or  in  terms  of  the  capital-asset pricing model that the common stock had  a 
zero beta.
With  the assumption  of constant  return  and variance of return,  the distri- bution of returns 
on the underlying stock at expiration  of the  warrant would be lognormally distributed. We used 
the Sprenkle formulation  to find the ter- minal  value  of  the  warrant  using  a  constant  
interest  rate  as  the  expected rate of return on the stock. But, we wanted  the  present value 
of the warrant. The  key  here  was  to  realize  that  although  the  warrant  would  have  
greater price variability  than the underlying  stock, if we assume  that the stock had a zero 
beta, the warrant would  have a zero beta. If the  warrant had a zero beta each  period of  time, 
the  warrant had  also  to return  the interest rate, r, each period of time.
If we had  decided  to value the warrant using the actual expected return on the  common  stock  
or, for  that  matter,  any other  appreciation  rate,  the  dis- count  rate  to value  the 
warrant would  depend  on  time  and  changes  in  the stock price. It does not for the zero-beta 
case. Using Sprenkle's formula with the assumption  that the expected  return on common stock and  
the  discount rate  for  the  warrant  was  equal  to  a  constant  interest  rate,  we  obtained  
the Black-Scholes  option-pricing formula.

w(x,t)  = x N(d,) - c e "t t*) N(d  )

where N(d) is the cumulative normal density function, c is the exercise price, t* is the expiration 
date, and t is the current date, t*—t is the remaining num- ber of periods in the life of the 
option, and “e” is the exponential operator. Lastly,

d,  = [In x/c  +  (r + l /2o°)  (t* — t) ]  /  o    t*    t



We checked the formula against the differential equation and, as we expect- ed, it fit. We were 
sure that we had the correct formula for valuing call op- tions or warrants, the right to buy an 
asset at a fixed price, the exercise price, at maturity of the right, its expiration date. With 
minor adjustments we could value a put option, the right to sell an asset under similar terms.
From the formula, we were finally able to compute w , which was equal to N(d,), the required number 
of shares to hedge the option. The number of shares  will  change  over  time  and  as  the  price  
of  the  underlying  security changes with respect to the exercise price. But, given the 
assumptions it is a known quantity each time period.
The formulation  also suggests the technology necessary to price any con- tingent  claim  that 
depends  on an underlying  asset's price  (or even  other state variables)  and time. This is so 
even  with differential  known  pay-outs,

Myron  A.  Scholes                                             135

such as dividends on a stock or coupons on a bond, that are not received by the option holder. The 
technology suggests that what is necessary is to hedge the stochastic  term, Ax, to create an 
alternative  investment  that is riskless. Merton (1973) formalized these relations.
We had spent a considerable amount of time working to finish up several other papers including our 
paper on testing the capital asset pricing model. As a result, we finished a draft of the paper 
sometime in the winter of 1970. We  did  not  know  whether  our  formulation  was  exact,  but  
intuitively  we thought investors could diversify away any residual risk that was left. For lar- 
ger price changes in the common stock, the hedge position of being long the option and short the 
appropriate number of shares of stock would tend to make money whether the market went up or down, 
and would lose money on small changes in the market portfolio. The risk of the position appeared to 
be independent of market risk. We programmed the model and tried to under- stand the sensitivity of 
the price of the option to changes in the stock price, time to maturity, volatility, and the 
interest rate.
We presented a draft of the paper at a conference on capital market theo- ry sponsored by Wells 
Fargo Bank in July of 1970. Later that summer, on va- cation together, Fischer and I worked out the 
applications of the option-pric-
ing framework to the pricing of risky debt and other capital structure issues. We viewed the common 
stock of a company with debt in its capital structure as a call option. The equity holders have an 
option to buy back the firm from the debt holders by paying off the face amount of the debt at its 
maturity. The equity holders will not buy back the firm from the debt holders at the matu- rity of 
the debt if the face amount of the debt is less than  the value of the firm's assets; they will 
turn the remaining assets of the firm over to the debt holders. For us, it was exciting to realize 
that the equity of a corporation was an option, and that our framework applied far more broadly 
than the valu- ation  of  warrants  or  put  and  call  options.  The  methodology  provided  a 
systematic approach that relied on arbitrage to value the capital structures of firms,  and  to  
understand  how  management  decisions  affect  the  relative values of debt and equity in the 
firm's capital structure.
As it turned out, Robert Merton, who had written an earlier paper on the valuation  of  warrants  
with  Paul  Samuelson  (see  Samuelson  and  Merton, 1969) following on Samuelson (1965a) early 
work on warrent valuation, had expected to attend our session at the Wells Fargo conference, but he 
over- slept and missed the session. In the winter and spring of 1970, Fischer and I searched the 
academic literature to determine how close others were to our invention. Fischer and I realized 
that the Samuelson and Merton paper con- tained an equilibrium model to value warrants but they did 
not value the war- rant  continuously.  Given  that  there  was  friendly  rivalry  between  the  
two teams, Fischer and I wanted to progress, on our own, as far as we could prior to the 
conference.
After the conference, in the early fall, Robert Merton and I discussed the Black-Scholes valuation 
methodology and option-valuation formula. He was not convinced that using the capital asset pricing 
model framework was suffi-

1S6                  Economic  Sciences  1997

cient. It seemed to him that, as the interval of adjustment of the hedge be- came closer to 
continuous time, there might still be covariance between the hedged position and the market return. 
Merton and I speculated  that one way that there would be no such covariance would be if the return 
on the op- tion was perfectly correlated with the return on the stock in continuous time, and 
therefore the hedge was exact. Merton later proved that the hedged po- sition in continuous time 
was riskless, and that the replicating portfolio argu- ment was exact. Fischer and I used this 
derivation in the final version of the paper because  it relied on arbitrage and not on any 
underlying  model of capital market equilibrium. However, we still presented the capital asset 
pric- ing model derivation of the model, as it provided us with the many insights we used to unlock 
the puzzles of option pricing.
Merton (1973) then started working on his paper on various aspects of the option formula. He 
incorporated his alternative proof of the option-pricing model. He also showed that the right to 
exercise a call option prior to matur- ity is not valuable for a non-dividend paying stock, but 
valuable for a put op- tion on a similar stock. He also showed how to incorporate changes in inter- 
est rates into the valuation  methodology,  and generalized  the formula  to handle other state 
variables.
To our  dismay,  when  we  submitted  a  version  of our  paper  entitled  “A Theoretical Valuation 
Formula for Options, Warrants, and Other Securities” (October, 1970)  to the Journal  of  Political 
 Economy,  it was rejected  without review. The his     of Economics  and  Statistics  also 
rejected the paper. Fischer felt that the paper was rejected because he was not an academic; I felt 
that I was an unknown Assistant Professor and the paper would not be considered to be broad enough 
for those academic journals. With the help of Merton Miller and Eugene Fama, who took an interest 
in the paper and stepped in on our behalf, the Journal of Political Economy agreed to consider the 
paper if we revised it and broadened its applicability. We had planned to publish the 
corporate-finance-capital structure applications in a subsequent paper but we broadened the 
original paper and showed how corporate liabilities could be viewed as options.. The final version 
of the paper was published in 1973 in the Journal  of Politicaf  Economy  under the title “The 
Pricing of Options and Cor- porate Liabilities.”


2.1 The Aftermath
In Black and Scholes (1972) , we tested the option pricing model using data recorded in a 
transactions diary of a broker in the over-the-counter option's market provided to us by another 
Master's student at MIT. The diary listed the prices at which he sold options to his clients. Using 
simple estimates of the volatility, the model generally performed well. It produced profits if one 
could buy options at diary-market prices if the model indicated a higher value than the market and 
sell options at diary-market prices if the model indicated a lower value than the market. Each 
trading day, we assumed that the model could be used to determine the hedge ratio, the delta, and 
undertook these

Myron  A.  Scheds                                                   157

hedges (assuming that transaction costs were zero). We regressed the daily re- turns on our hedged 
portfolio on the market returns. As expected, the port- folio returns were uncorrelated with the 
market returns, but the model pro- duced substantial and significant abnormal profits. The market 
appeared to ignore information available in the historical data on estimating volatility.
When we assumed  that we could buy the undervalued  and sell the over- valued options at model 
prices and hedge out the underlying stock risk, we incurred significant losses. These losses were 
incurred because using simple estimates of the volatility ignored information  on future volatility 
 that the market was using to price the options. When actual realized volatility over the life of 
the option was used to compute the model prices, buying undervalued and selling overvalued options 
at model prices generated returns that were insignificantly different from zero.
It became apparent to us that the transaction costs of dealing in the over- the-counter market were 
quite large. The dealers would only sell options. As a result, the market in put and call options 
was quite small. The world was about to change. In the early 1970s, various studies were 
commissioned  to provide an economic justification  for a new options exchange. As a result, The 
Chicago  Board  Options Exchange  (CBOE)  was born  in 1973  almost simultaneously with the 
publication of the Black-Scholes and Merton option- pricing papers. The reduction in transaction  
costs and the transparency of the market were justifications enough for the subsequent success of 
the op- tions market.
It is ironic that these empirical tests of the Black-Scholes model were pub- lished in the Journal  
of Finance  in the proceedings  volume of the  American Finance Association Meetings, in May of 
1972, a full year prior to the publication of the model itself. Although we did not present it as 
such, it is ironic that the methodology in the paper is generally the same as that used today by 
finan- cial entities to manage the risks of their trading positions and to measure the performance 
of their traders.

2.2 Historical Notes: From Theory  to Practice
Both the derivative exchange industry and the derivative academic industry grew significantly from 
1973 to 1985. Financial economists started to interact with a broad set of practitioners and this 
led to a cross-fertilization of ideas among the participants in both industries.
The  option-pricing  technology  was  adopted  simply  because  it  reduced transaction costs. For 
without a model, traders could neither price securities with  imbedded  options  with  sufficient  
accuracy  to compete  against  other traders with models, nor could they reduce the risk of their 
positions to em- ploy their capital efficiently at a low enough cost to compete with other trad- 
ers. Although it is hard to prove, I do think that the success of the CBOE and other exchanges,  in 
part, can  be attributable  to option-pricing models. As traders became familiar with  these 
models, bid-offer spreads narrowed. As traders became more familiar with risk-management techniques 
they could take on larger position sizes to support the market. With a deeper and more

1S8

efficient market, investors began to use options to facilitate their own invest-
ment strategies.
In  those  formative  years,  notable  extensions  and additions  to the  basic framework include 
important contributions by Black (1975, 1976) , Banz and Miller  (1978) , Breeden  and  
Litzenberger  (1978), Brennan  and  Schwartz (1979) ,  Cox  and  Ross  (1976) ,  Cox,  Ross  and  
Rubinstein  (1979) ,  Geske (1979), Harrison and Kreps (1979), Magrabe  (1978), Merton  (see 
Merton, 1992a) , Parkinson  (1977) , Richard (1978) , Ross (1976), Rubinstein  (1976) , Scholes ( 
1976) , Sharpe (1978) , and Vasicek (1977) .
In 1971, Fischer Black left Boston to become a Professor at the University of Chicago. In 1972, 
Robert Merton and I became consultants to Donaldson, Lufkin and Jenrette  (DU) to build 
mathematical  models to price so-called “Down-and-Out Options” and to build their options 
technology to price call options in the event of a launch of the CBOE. Leo Pomerance, the head of 
the DU options group, was an options trader from the old school; he traded OTC  options  using  
intuition  and  experience  without  regard  to a formal model. He later became the first chairman 
of the CBOE. At DU we forged a marriage  of  the  old-time  trader  types,  with  their  mental  
set,  with  young mathematical modeling types, with their model assumptions, to add value for the 
firm.
The spread of the option-valuation technology was rapid once the CBOE launched  its first contracts 
on listed securities. Initially, many of the older- market-wise  traders rejected  using a model  
to price options. And, initially prices were not in line with prices predicted from using the 
Black-Scholes model adjusting for dividends and using relatively simple estimates of volati- lity 
to price the options. This left an opportunity for younger model-based traders to step in and 
profit from price discrepancies in the market. They used the model to price options and to 
determine  the appropriate  hedge ratios to reduce the risk of their positions. Generally, 
retaining these risks had zero present value because  traders had little expertise in forecasting  
stock returns. By so doing they could undertake larger positions and enhance their profits by 
concentrating on risks that could add to their profits.
In Galai (1975) , Dan Galai, one of my Ph.D. students as the University of Chicago, where I had 
returned in 1973, tested the pricing of options on the CBOE in the first year of its existence 
using the model with simple historical estimates of the volatility. He found that the profits on 
trading options; that is, buying undervalued contracts and selling overvalued contracts each day to 
maintain a neutral risk position, were even greater than those found in our original tests. His 
strategies could achieve greater profits by reducing posi- tions if the prices of options return to 
model values prior to the expiration of the contract. Transaction costs could have reduced actual 
trading profits for other than the option dealers.
By the end of the first year of trading options, it was no longer possible to use simple estimates 
of the historical volatility to spot opportunities in the market. Many of the clearing firms, who 
financed the positions of the option traders, used the model and the hedge ratios to determine  the 
net risk of

Myron  A.   Scholes                                                          1S9

each of these traders. Fischer had started a service to provide option prices and the 
share-equivalent positions (hedge ratios) on each of the options trad- ed on the various exchanges. 
He used a more sophisticated estimate of vola- tility  to  price  the  options.  He  combined  
historical  estimates  adjusted  for changes in stock-market levels, with the volatility implied by 
the prices of op- tions. As is true even  to this day, as the market-price  level of securities in- 
creases relative to a previous level over a relatively short period of time, the volatility of 
stocks tends to fall. This result is due, in part, to a reduction in the leverage of the underlying 
equities. Given the rate of interest, the price of the common stock, the dividend yields, the 
exercise price, and the maturity date of the option, the model can be used to infer the implied 
volatility that the market is using to price the option. In fact, even today, options are described 
in terms of implied volatility. Traders are asked whether they want to buy or sell volatility. 
Although his volatility estimates held some cache for a while, ad- vanced computer technology made 
Fischer's pricing sheets obsolete after a few years.
In fact, Texas Instruments  marketed a hand-held  calculator  in 1977 that
gave the Black-Scholes model values and hedge ratios. When I asked them for royalties, they replied 
that our work was in the public domain; when I asked, at least, for a calculator, they suggested  
that I  buy one. I never did. Robert Merton and I continued to consult for DLJ Working with Mathew 
Gladstein,
we decided that the time might be appropriate  to provide investors with a
fund that protected their downside risk but allowed for some upside partici- pation  in  the  
performance  of  the  stock  market.  To  achieve  this goal, we decided  that the assets of the 
fund would be held in two parts: in any six- month period, 90% of the assets would be held in U.S. 
Treasury bills and 10% of the assets would be used to buy a diversified portfolio of call options. 
In several  papers, Merton, Scholes and Gladstein  (1978, 1982)  simulated  the performance 
characteristics of such a strategy using the underlying stocks of the options that were traded in 
the various markets. The return characteris- tics were as predicted by the theory: losses were 
truncated and gains were less than a direct investment in the underlying stocks. The returns on the 
strate- gy were non-linearly related to the market. We always stressed the role of op- tions as 
insurance.  In early 1976, we attempted  to launch Money Markets Options Investments  under the 
auspices of Phoenix Investment Counsel of Boston. Unfortunately, the fund raised only a small 
amount of money. simulation results indicated that fully-covered investment strategies; that is, a 
sale of an option on a position in the underlying stock (for example, long 100 shares of IBM and 
short a call option to buy 100 shares of IBM), would pro- vide returns of only the premium received 
on the option approximately 60% of the time. Call-option holders would call their stock away if the 
stock price were above the exercise price on expiration of the contract and would not ex- ercise 
call options if the stock price were below the exercise price at expira- tion. This strategy 
produces higher current income but with the possibility of capital losses just like a high-yield 
bond. The expected return, however, was less than the expected return on the money market-options 
strategy. At about

140               ñcotio  ttc Sciences  1997

this time other  investment  companies  marketed  the fully-covered  strategy, which we thought 
exhibited inferior return characteristics for most investors, and  naturally, to our dismay, were 
quite successful because of the  promises of higher income  (but at the unadvertised  expense of 
expected capital losses.)

3. THE PRESENT
The   past  twenty years has seen  a  transformation  of  the  entire  financial  ser- vices 
industry,  first in  the  United States, and  now around  the world.  During the 1970s and  1980s, 
regulations divided the activities of financial institutions into separate  market segments.  In  
the  U.S.,  commercial  banks  handled  de- posits and  made commercial  loans; investment  banks 
were involved  in  mer- gers,  acquisitions  and  underwriting;  brokerage  companies  sold  stocks 
 and bonds;  savings  and   loans,  along  with  banks,  initiated  and  held  mortgages; and, 
insurance companies sold life, and  property and casualty insurance pro- ducts. Many of the  
regulations were directed at preserving the profitability of these  institutions  by  restricting  
competition,  mainly  at  the  expense  of  the users of these services. Each institution  had a 
product focus; for example, de- posits, or life insurance, or commercial loans. No financial 
company served a broad range of its clients' financial needs.
As happens at times, it is not  possible for regulators  to protect  the profita- bility of the 
industries they regulate. In the U.S., mutual funds competed with banks  in  providing  deposit  
services  after  banks  were  not  permitted  to  pay market interest rates on deposits in the 
early 1970s. The  growth of institution- al investors  managing  pension  funds and  mutual funds 
forced  the abolition of  fixed  commission  rates  to  trade  securities  in  the  U.S.  and   
around  the world. The  larger brokerage firms evolved  to compete against the  banks and the 
savings and  loan associations in packaging and  repackaging mortgages to broaden  the extent of  
the market. Banks started to compete with brokerage, investment  banks,  and  insurance  companies  
in  financing  commercial  real estate  and   financing  highly-leveraged  mergers  and  
acquisitions,  so-called “Leveraged  Buyouts.”  It is nearly impossible  to maintain  regulations  
that re- strict activities in one  industry when new competitors not subject to costly re- 
gulations are attacking the  profitable  businesses of that industry.
The  driving  force  behind  today's  tidal  wave  of  financial  innovation  has been the 
reduction in the cost of computer and communications technology. This  lower-cost  technology  has 
led  to a globalization  of  the  product  and  fi- nancial markets. Corporate and institutional  
needs have become  more com- plex. Investors are demanding more services. Technology  brings new 
compe- titors to the market who can offer similar and  expanded services at lower cost than 
existing competitors can. The growth of lower cost providers of broker- age services such as 
Schwab, Fidelity, and  Internet brokers are examples.
Financial service firms today must decide which clients to serve, determine those clients'  needs 
and  then decide which  products and  services add value for their clients as well as their own 
shareholders. Firms that were quite sim- ilar  fifteen  years  ago  have  become  very  different  
today.  For  instance, J

Myron  A.  Scholes                                                 141

Morgan, a wholesale bank, today differs far more from Citicorp, a retail bank than it did in the 
early 1980s. Conversely, firms that were quite different from each other fifteen years ago have 
become quite similar today. It is hard to dis- tinguish  the activities of today’sJ.P. Morgan from 
UBS, from Goldman Sachs or Merrill Lynch. Meanwhile, A.I.G. and Travelers,  both insurance compani- 
es, these days offer a number of services that are similar  to those offered  by Goldman Sachs or 
UBS. Investment banks no longer merely structure and ad- vise in transactions  but instead  have 
moved  to a more  packaged, integrated, convenient  financial-solutions  approach,  directed  at  
solving  the  complex problems of their clients around the world.
The  many  advances  in  financial  theory  have  enabled  financial  services firms  to  meet  
those  complex  needs  more effectively  and at lower  cost  than was possible previously. The 
marriage  of business school and economics  de- partment graduates with engineers, mathematicians, 
physicists and computer scientists  has  led  to  more  efficient  and  lower-cost  financial  
engineering solutions to client problems.
To  date,  the  major  growth  in  the  use  of  derivatives  has  been  fueled  by trends toward 
securitization and the increased understanding of the role that derivatives can  play in the 
unbundling,  packaging, and  transferring  of risks. No  longer  do  financial  service  firms  
only  sell  the  same  products  they  buy from  clients.  Instead,  they  break  the  products  
down  into  their  component parts and  either sell the parts or recombine  them  into new and 
hybrid  cue tom-tailored  financial instruments. And, this unbundling and repackaging is only in 
the beginning stages of evolution.
With  information  asymmetries  between  clients and  their  financial  service providers, it would 
be prohibitively expensive for a client to develop close re- lations with  many financial service 
firms. To be productive,  the financial  ser- vice firm must learn  the needs of its clients and  
understand  their businesses. As a result, it can be expert to only a select client list. Clients 
find it inefficient to “shop” widely for new financial service firms. Creating custom-tailored so- 
lutions  strengthens  relations  between   the  financial  services  firm  and  its clients.  It 
would  be  too costly for each  client to replicate  the specialized  ex- pertise  required  to 
engineer financial  theory solutions; such  talent would  be underutilized  most  of  the  time. It 
would  be analogous  to every corporation maintaining  an  entire full-service  law firm  on its 
premises.  Notwithstanding many regulators' fears, it is not likely that all financial service 
firms will disap- pear if left to compete in the global arena. Product standardization will erode 
profits  more quickly  than  in  the  past because  more diverse  entities, such  as General  
Electric or Enron  or accounting firms can compete  in  providing fi- nancial services using 
financial technology. New competition will enter various markets from global competitors. Although 
inefficient financial service firms will  disappear  more  quickly  than  in  the  past,  their  
clients will  obtain  more value-enhancing and less costly services from  the remaining financial 
service firms. Financial products are becoming so specialized  that, for the most part, it would be 
prohibitively expensive to trade them in organized markets.
Financial service firms have become the leaders in using derivatives in their

142              ñcotiomic  Sciences  199'7

risk-management programs. Using information and option-pricing technolo- gy, financial  services  
firms can  not only value  their commitments,  such  as guarantees and other derivative contracts, 
but also are moving to understand the sensitivities of their holdings to various market factors. 
They can decide what risks to transfer and what risks to retain.
Tables 1 and 2 show the growth of derivative contracts trading since 1986 in both the exchange 
industry and in the OTC industry. The cells of the tables contain the “notional principal amounts 
outstanding” for various categories of derivative contracts. For example, the face amount of stock 
market index options (including call and put options) at the end of 1986 stood at $37.8 bil- lion 
and by the end of 1996 grew to $380.2 billion.’
These tables indicate that the OTC market in derivatives has grown much faster than the exchange 
market in the last 10 years. In 1995, turnover on the major derivative exchanges around the world 
actually declined while OTC ac- tivity rose by 40 percent. The Bank for International Settlements 
estimated that outstanding OTC contracts exceeded $47.5 trillion in early 1995, much greater than 
the numbers reported in Table 2. To put these values into per- spective,  the  value  of  all  
outstanding  debt  in  Europe, Japan  and  North America totaled $25.8 trillion in 1995.
The growth of the OTC market will continue to outstrip the growth of the exchange market because 
the clients of the financial service firms need assis- tance  to structure  their financial 
programs. The current growth path is to provide more client-focused structured solutions to 
problems. Clients likely would find it less expensive to execute a program through their financial 
ser- vice firm than to execute it themselves in the exchange market. This is even more likely if 
the positions must be adjusted frequently to hedge risks.
Moreover, the relative growth of the OTC market is overstated because the exchange  markets require 
that entities post margin  on contracts each day. Futures contracts are settled at the end of each 
day. Forward contracts, such as swaps and options written by OTC firms such as caps and floors, are 
not settled each day. The product offerings are different. The financial service firms and their 
counterparts rely on each other's credit. Most financial ser- vice firms can post collateral on OTC 
contracts, which is very similar to sett- ling the contracts as in the case of posting margin on an 
exchange. These en- tities will  use either  the financial futures and options markets or the OTC 
markets. They will use the industry that provides services at lower cost. Many entities, however, 
are not indifferent to posting collateral. In particular, many


See   “International  Capital   Markets,  Developments,  Prospects  and  Key  Policy  Issues,” 
International Monetary Fund (September 1997) for the source of these statistics. The notional 
amount outstanding is not an economic measure of the size of the market. The notional amount of a 
swap or an option is the amount on which the contract is based. It is not the value that the 
security would trade at in the market. For example, if a call option to buy $100,000 of a major- 
market index trades at $5,000, the notional amount is recorded as $100,000 while the economic value 
is only $5,000. The economic value of swaps and options might be as low as 2% and 5    of the  
notional  outstanding  amounts  of  the  contracts.  These  statistics  provide  estimates  of  the 
growth of the derivative market.



Table  1. Markets for Selected Deriva0ve Financial Instruments:  Notional Principal Amounts 
Outstanding:  1986-96  (In biflions of U.S. doHars)
1986        1987          1988          1989          1990          1991          1992          
1993          1994          1995          1996
Interest rate futures                  370.0       487.7         895.4       1,200.8       1,454.5  
     2,156.7       2,913.0       4,958.7       5,777.6       5,863.4       5,931.1
Interest rate options'                146.5       122.6          279.2         387.9         599.5  
     1,072.6       1,385.4       2,362.4       2,623.6       2,741.8       3,277.8
Currencyfutures                       10.2         14.6           12.1           16.0           
17.0           18.3           26.5           34.7           40.1           38.3           50.3
Currencyoptionsi                               39.2         59.5           48.0           50.2      
     56.5           62.9           71.1           75.6           55.6           43.2           46.5
Stockmarketindexfutures         14.5        17.8           27.1           41.3           69.1       
    76.0           79.8         110.0         127.3         172.2         198.6
Stockmarketindexoptionsl        37.8         27.7           42.9           70.7           93.7      
   132.8         158.6         229.7          238.3          329.3         380.2
Total                                      618.3       729.9       1,304.8       1,766.9       
2,290.4       3,519.3       4,634.4       7,771.1       8,862.6       9,188.2       9,884.6
North America                     518.1       578.1         951.7       1,155.8       1,268.5       
2,151.7       2,694.7       4,358.6       4,819.5       4,849.6       4,839.7
Europe                                 13.1        13.3         177.7         251.0         461.2   
       710.1       1,114.3       1,777.9       1,831.7       2,241.6       2,831.7
Asia-Pacific                             87.0       138.5         175.4         360.0         560.5 
        657.0         823.5       1,606.0       2,171.8       1,990.1       2,154.0
Other                                     0.0          0.0             0.0             0.1          
   0.2             0.5             1.8           28.7           39.5         106.8           59.3
' Calls plus puts.
Table 2. Notional Principal  Value of Outstanding Interest Rate and Currency Swaps of the Members 
of the International  Swaps and Derivatives Association,
1987—J •e 1996 (In billions of  U.S. dollars)                                                       
                                                                                                    
                                                                                       0
1987          1988          1989          1990          1991          1992          1993          
1994          1996   {une 1996

Interest rate swaps All counterparties Interbank (I SDA member)
Financial Institutions Governments' Corporations"
Currency swaps
All counterparties (adjusted for reporting

682.9       t,101.2       1,502.6       2,311.5       3,065.1       3,850.8       6,177.3       
8,815.6     12,810.7     15,584.2

206.6    341.3    547.1    909.5   1,342.3   l,880.8   2,967.9   4,533.9   7,100.6       -
300.0         421.3         579.2         817.1          985.7       1,061.1       1,'7T5.'7       
2,144.4       3,435.0               —
4'7.6           63.2           '76.2         136.9         165.5          242.8         32'7.\      
    307.6         500.9               —
128.6         168.9         295.2         447.9         571.7         666.2       1,166.6       
1,829.8       1,774.2               —
of both sides)                       182.8          319.6         449.1         577.5         807.2 
        860.4         899.6         914.8       1,197.4       1,294.7
Interest rate options"                    0.0         327.3         537.3         561.3         
577.2         634.5       1,397.6       1,572.8       3,704.5       4,190.1
Total                                      865.6       1,657.1       2,489.0       3,450.3       
4,449.5       5,345.7       8,474.6     11,303.2     17,712.6      21,068.9
' Including international institutions. ’ Including others.
Including caps, collars, floors, and swaptions.

144                               Economic  Sciences  1992

OTC swap and option contracts have a financial entity and a corporation as counterparts because the 
corporation is willing to pay the financial entity to post margin for it in the futures or options 
market. That is, the financial ser- vices firm enters into a swap with a corporate entity, which 
does not post col- lateral, and the financial service firm hedges its market risk by entering into 
an  offsetting  swap  with  another  financial  service  firm  or by using  the  ex- 
change-derivatives industry. In either case, the financial service firm posts col- lateral or 
margin on its transactions. It is the lower cost producer of margin services. Financial service 
firms have the capacity and the personnel  to un- dertake  the pricing  of credit risk and can 
handle these transactions;  many corporate entities currently do not.
To the extent that collateral is not posted on the obligation, one conse- quence of the these 
transactions is that the financial service firm and the cor- poration are exposed to each other's 
credit risk. The corporation  buying a call option on an underlying debt instrument from the 
financial service firm has credit risk to the extent of the value of the call option. The financial 
ser- vice firm can fail to honor its obligation to deliver the underlying debt in- strument. The 
financial service firm holding a put option, issued by the cor- poration, on the same debt 
instrument is a creditor of the corporation to the extent of the value of the put option. A swap 
contract, which states that the corporation will receive a fixed rate of interest on an underlying 
debt instru- ment and pay a floating rate of interest, is equivalent to the corporation being long 
a call option and short a put option.
The other major reason that the OTC industry will continue to grow faster than the exchange 
industry is that financial service firms and others need on- ly to hedge the remaining factor risks 
of their portfolio positions, which is a far smaller amount than their gross contracting with their 
clients. Moreover, depending on the costs, they can hedge either with another financial service 
firm or in the exchange industry. The financial service firm that hedges fac- tor risks retains the 
remaining risk, the so-called “basis risk,” of its net posi- tions.
Another reason for the growth of the OTC market has been that the out- standing  amounts in Table 2 
do not necessarily represent net exposures. It might be less expensive for a corporation or a 
financial service firm to enter into an offsetting derivative contract with another counterparty 
than it would be to unwind the initial contract. If it does, the contract volume increases but the 
net exposure falls.

3.1 The Present:  The Pathologies
From  the  perspective  of  market  commentators,  many  regulators,  and  the public, derivatives 
tend to top the list of suspects when the stock market turns downward  or  when  entities  announce 
 unanticipated  financial  losses.  The press, the public and regulators fear derivatives, in part, 
because they are new and, in part, because their growth has appeared to be so explosive over the 
last ten years. Although they vastly overstate the economic exposure, notional amounts as high as 
$45 trillion cause worry. The press and others credit the

Myron  A.  Scholes                                             145

market crash of 1987 to portfolio insurance, an attempt to dynamically repli- cate  the  returns  
on options. Even  in  this  time,  market  pundits  warn  that forms of dynamic  hedging could 
foster a severe market downturn.  Widely publicized  losses attributed  to derivative  trading  in 
the 1990s include:  the leveraged-derivative contracts issued by Bankers Trust to firms such as 
Proc- tor and Gamble and Gibson Greeting (over $150 million in losses) ; the loss of
$1.5 billion by Shell Sekiyu, the losses incurred by Orange County investing in  inverse   boaters; 
  the  bankruptcy   of  Metallgesellschaft  and  Barings Corporation  (both over $1 billion in 
losses) and many other losses by finan- cial service firms such  as UBS, Salomon  Brothers,  etc. 
Obviously,  many of these losses are overstated because there were gains made by the other side to 
these contracts: It is only the dead-weight costs to society that result in actual loss. For 
excellent discussions of the entire range of purported pathologies and an excellent review of the 
literature addressing  these issues see Miller (1997) , who argues that most, if not all, of the 
“diagnoses” of severe patholo- gies are misdiagnosed.
Yet, the growth of these industries depicted in Tables 1 and 2 clearly sug- gests that these 
instruments have added net value. It is hard to believe such growth could continue for so many 
years without value being realized by the clients of financial service firms, the shareholders of 
these firms and the ex- changes. I have argued in Scholes (1995, 1996a) that the development of fi- 
nancial infrastructure might lag financial innovation. It is costly to develop controls and 
firm-wide understanding of new products that are in the proto- type phase  of their development.  
Prototypes are built using existing infra- structure. For an innovation as long lasting and 
profitable as derivatives, the OTC  industry,  the  exchange  industry  and  the  academic  
industry  find  it profitable  to build  the infrastructure necessary  to support  them.  Each  of 
these industries has a vested interest in profiting from adding value that is sustainable, so each 
will attempt to invest in the cost-effective infrastructure necessary to preserve this value.
This is not to argue that we have seen the end of derivative failures. There will  be  losses  
sustained  as  in  many  other  business  activities.  In  1997,  the Governments of many countries 
in Asia could no longer support the losses of their financial institutions resulting from defaulted 
commercial and real es- tate loans. Although many banks had been economically bankrupt without the 
support of their Governments (that is; the value of their equity would ha- ve  been  effectively  
zero  without  Government  implicit  guarantees) ,  the Governments allowed these banks to 
participate in any potential gains and sheltered them against bank runs by promising  to pay off 
their depositors. These options were costly to society, and it will be difficult to prove that they 
were value enhancing. In part, other countries, through the grants made by the International  
Monetary Fund, as the lenders of last resort to these and other countries, may have written the put 
options that supported the activities of the financial institutions of the region and granting 
these options might have encouraged risk taking and even unprofitable activities.
Moreover,  absent  government  guarantees,  some  brokerage  houses  and

146                             Economic  Sciences  1997

banks in Japan probably would be bankrupt, because while these entities had promised clients 
protection against loss on any decline in value of Japanese stocks, they did not hedge their 
commitments. Clients might have paid for
these put options through higher commission rates in Japan. These Japanese financial service 
entities, however, suffered severe losses when their clients ex- ercised these put rights during 
the decline in the value of Japanese stocks in the1990s. The entities currently are not required to 
value their commitments on a mark-to-the-market basis. As a result, neither regulators, nor 
investors nor even senior management could deduce the financial condition of the en- tities. In all 
probability, the extent of these losses could have been mitigated if risk management policies had 
been put in place.

4. THE FUTURE
The future will be a continuation  of the present. Financial  innovation will continue at the same 
or at even an accelerating pace because of the insatiable demand  for lower-cost,  more  efficient 
solutions  to client problems.  Infor- mation and financial technology will continue to expand and 
so will the circle of understanding of how to use this technology. There is value to investing in 
education. Financial service firms will expand the use of this technology  to manage  their own 
activities. Otherwise, they will have to face mergers with other financial service entities. 
Although some would like to see derivatives wither  in importance,  they will not, for they have  
become  essential  mech- anisms in the tool kit of financial innovation.
Scholes and Wolfson (1992) used the concepts of frictions and restrictions to illustrate how tax 
rules and other regulations affect investor and corporate behavior.  As  Merton  (1992)  argues,  
the  functions  of  a  financial  system change far less than institutions. Institutions change 
because lower-cost solu- tions  that reduce  information  asymmetries  are found  to facilitate  
transac- tions, to provide funding for large-scale  investment projects, to transfer sa- vings  
across  borders  and  into  the  future,  and  provide  more  efficient risk-sharing and 
diversification mechanisms.
Most financial instruments are derivative contracts in one form or another. Black and Scholes 
(1973) pointed out that the equity holders of a firm with debt in its capital structure have an 
option to buy back the firm from its debt- holders at maturity  of the  debt.  The  high-yield  
bond  (the so-called  ‘junk bond”)  is a riskier  debt-option  contract  than  more-highly  rated  
corporate debt. Corporate debt and equity contracts are derivative to underlying invest- ments. 
Other lines of research on so-called “real options” indicate that even the investment decisions of 
firms are better understood by using an option framework  rather  than  a  more  conventional  
present-value-analysis frame- work.
Standard debt and equity contracts are institutional arrangements or box- es. They provide 
particular cash flows to investors with their own particular risk and return characteristics. These 
institutional arrangements survive only because  they  provide  lower  cost  solutions  than  
competing  alternative  ar-

Myron  A.   Scholes                                                       147

rangements. Competitive opportunities evolve over time with changing fric- tions and restrictions. 
Because of information asymmetries and regulatory re- strictions, investors might require a higher 
rate of return to hold these stan- dard-form  contracts  than  contracts  (now and in  the future)  
of alternative design but of similar risk. Time will continue to blur the distinctions between debt 
and equity.
The firm's investment set is generally the composite of coarse bundles of payoffs. Firms issue 
claims to finance these activities, claims that themselves represent  bundles  of  coarse  cash  
flows.  It will  become  more  efficient  for financial service firms to offer new derivative 
securities in various forms to break cash flows into finer gradients that can be tailored to the 
specific needs of demanders and suppliers of capital. In the process, dead-weight costs are 
mitigated, thereby reducing the cost of capital. The financial service firm can sell the newly 
created securities or retain them in whole or in part for its own account. It can create new 
products on its own name or use the OTC or ex- change markets to hedge its risks. Given information 
asymmetries, it will use the lower-cost solution.

4.1 Investor Demands
In recent years, we have witnessed a movement from a limited number of in- vestors holding an 
undiversified portfolio of their own home-country securi- ties to many more investors holding 
diversified portfolios domestically and in- ternationally. More and more investors around  the 
world, who have never invested in financial products other than through social promises made by 
their governments, will become more willing to select from a broad class of “mutual-fund”  type 
offerings. Although the diversity of products has grown, few tools are in place other than in 
academic circles that allow investors to make informed portfolio allocation decisions. As Franco 
Modigliani, the 1985 Nobel laureate, has argued, individuals want to smooth consumption over the 
life cycle. If it were more cost efficient, investors would want to insure against contingencies, 
control risks more efficiently, and plan their investments effi- ciently to meet life-cycle needs. 
As information and financial technology be- come more easily available, financial service firms 
will repackage investments to meet these investor demands, and this will spur financial innovation. 
The financial service firm will offer products in its own name that promise speci- fic risk and 
return patterns; these firms will also offer products in the form of mutual  funds.  The 
classifications of investment  products  into stock funds, bond funds, growth, income, etc. will 
diminish in importance with reduced costs to understand risk, return, and contingent payoffs.
Even  today,  the  boxes  that define  institutional-fund arrangements  have blurred. For example, 
if a pension fund manager wants to achieve a stock-in- dex fund return, she can invest with an 
index-fund provider that buys a di- versified portfolio of the index-fund stocks. She can achieve 
the same result, however, in myriad other ways including using another manager who might claim to 
have expertise in the bond market and can provide an enhanced re- turn  over  the  index-fund  
return.  To achieve  this,  the  enhanced  manager

148                               Economic  Sciences  1997

might undertake a complicated  strategy. He might hold a portfolio of under- valued corporate  and 
government  bonds, hedge  the credit risk of the  corpo- rate  bonds  by  selling  stock  short,  
and  hedge  the  price  risk  of  interest  rate movements  by using futures or options. He might 
buy stock-index futures to achieve  the systematic risk exposure of the stock-index fund. Given 
costs, the manager  might  be  able  to  produce  a  return  in  excess  of  that  achieved  by 
holding the index fund directly while the systematic risks of the two offerings would be exactly 
the same.
The  exchange  industry will compete with  the  OTC industry to provide in- vestment products. If 
the  exchange industry can provide efficient margining systems for those investors who can not post 
collateral in a cost efficient man- ner, those products that become standardized will most likely 
be ideally suited for  the  exchange  industry:  it  can  address  a  larger  set  of  participants 
 in  a lower-cost  marketplace.  The  exchange  industry  complements  the  OTC  in- dustry; they 
will grow together.

4.2 Corporate Demands for Derivatives
Finance specialists have puzzled over the reasons why corporations hedge the risks of  their cash  
flows. Under classical finance theory, it is often asked  why shareholders  of  a  firm  pay  it  
to  incur  costs  to  reduce  risk  when  they  can diversify on  their own account. The firm's 
managers should act as if the  firm is risk  neutral. Smith  and  Stulz  (1985)  provide  three  
reasons,  all  tied  to  the cost of financial distress, why a firm might hedge its cash flows. 
Because of the convexity  of  the  tax schedule, a firm  might issue  more debt only after hedg- 
ing its cash flows to reduce its expected operating losses and the resultant loss of  tax  
benefits.  Because  of  bankruptcy  costs  associated  with  high  levels  of debt,  the firm  that 
 hedges  can  use  more  debt  to finance  its activities.  As in Froot,  Scharfstein,  and  Stein  
(1993) , if  the  firm  can  hedge  its cash  flows,  a reduction in the probability of financial 
distress reduces the expected costs of financial distress and, as a result, encourages investment 
in profitable projects that might have been foregone without such hedging. This argument is based 
on  the observation  that firms are  reluctant  to issue equity, and, instead,  use retained 
earnings to finance investments before using the debt markets. Also, if a high-debt-to-equity firm 
were to become financially distressed it would not be  possible  to  issue  equity  to  finance  
business  activities.  Because  owner- managers in smaller firms might not be able to diversify 
their holdings, hedg- ing the cash flows of the firm might be a lower-cost alternative than selling 
off pieces of the firm to outsiders and  using the proceeds to diversify. If corpora- tions face 
these problems there are financial engineering solutions that might reduce  their import.
The corporate use of derivatives is not  limited  to hedging. Some corporate financial  strategists 
 believe  that  they  can  outperform  other  market  partici- pants in forecasting the direction 
of interest rates or commodity prices. Stulz (1996)  argues  that  firms  that  have  such  
financial  acumen  can  hedge  their downside exposures  by buying put  options. This allows  the 
financial officers of  the  firm  to  become  more  active  managers.  By  buying  put  options  or 
 by

Myron  A.  Scholes                                                 149

reducing systematic risks, they can use more leverage and increase their per- sonal stakes by 
reducing the costs of financial distress. This tactical use of de- rivatives probably explains a 
significant part of the growth of the use of deri- vatives attributable  to financial service firms 
and corporations, as shown in Tables 1 and 2.
As reported in Stulz  (1996) , empirical evidence gathered from surveys of corporations  indicates 
that large corporations without debt in their capital structures hedge cash flows more so than 
smaller corporations. And, those corporations that do hedge lift their hedges from time to time or 
do not fully hedge their exposures. It is these tactical uses of derivatives,  an attempt to “beat” 
the market using highly leveraged strategies, that have been the cause of most of the reported 
financial losses. Obviously, the successful tactical users of derivatives are most often absent in 
press reports. It is unlikely, however, that corporate  officials, on average, can  outperform  
other  market  partici- pants.
Large firms hedge cash flows, in part, to smooth reported financial earn- ings with the hope those 
smoother earnings will boost their price-to-earnings ratios. This might be a value-enhancing 
strategy if market participants can not discern whether the variability in earnings is caused by 
the firm's taking sys- tematic exposures to market factors or by firm-specific risks.
The Present is still young.  The Future will bring  many new solutions  to solve corporate 
problems. Many corporations and financial entities still need to learn and evaluate to what extent 
hedging and risk control can be benefi- cial to their activities. Smaller firms and product markets 
are just now becom- ing familiar with  the risk control aspects of these  financial  instruments.  
It may be surprising that in the United States the top 8 banks account for 94% (almost $19 
trillion)  of the total outstanding  notional amount in the OTC market as of the end of 1996.’ As 
of this date, the knowledge base or the fi- nancial acumen needed to financial engineer solutions 
to client problems is highly concentrated.
As in Scholes (1995, 1996a) , I argue that corporations will use risk mana- gement techniques to 
reduce their level of equity capital, and, as a result of risk management  techniques,  some firms 
that would have gone public will remain private. Equity capital is an expensive form of financing.  
There are large  differences  between  the  knowledge  base  of  insiders  and  outsiders. Insiders 
can not fully divulge their plans to outsiders for the fear that com- petitors will profit from 
this knowledge, and generally must sell shares at a dis- count. Moreover, tax and other 
considerations make the corporate form of undertaking activities in the U.S. and in other countries 
very expensive.
Equity is a risk-management device. It is an “all purpose” risk cushion. The more  equity a firm  
has,  the more  it cushions  itself  against  outcomes  that require it to go the capital markets 
in adverse times or when it might have to divulge its confidential  operating plans to outside 
parties. Hedging, on the other hand, is targeted risk control. Hedging requires more refined knowl-

’  See International Monetary Fund, op. cit.

150                               Economic  Sciences  1997

edge of the firm, and an understanding  of the interaction of investment re- turns and financing 
alternatives. Moreover, it requires that the firm be able to warrant to others that it will 
maintain a strategy of hedging its activities to sup- port higher levels of debt. But as the  costs 
to hedge fall relative  to the costs of equity, firms will substitute hedging for equity.
Moreover,  hedging  provides  ancillary  benefits  as  a  measurement  tool  to help calibrate  how 
the  firm is making money. In a diverse, decentralized  or- ganization,  management  information  
systems  might  not  divulge  the   true source of profits within  the organization;  that is, did 
profits arise because sys- tematic  risk exposures  produced  positive  returns,  or because  the  
entity  pos sessed  superior  skills?  Standard  accounting  neither  provides  risk  manage- ment  
reports which  decompose  profitability  into  profits from  market forces and  profits from 
managerial efforts, whether the firm is a manufacturing or a financial firm, nor does it describe 
the sensitivities of the firm's profit and loss to market  factors. As more  entities  use 
financial  engineering  skills,  the cur- rent accounting system will be under considerable  
pressure for change, as will many of  the current forms of regulations and  restrictions.
Because of differences in the required knowledge of insiders and outsiders, the growth of the  
private equities market has reduced  the disclosure costs of becoming  a  public  corporation.  
Private  equity  allows  expert  management teams to leverage  their activities. Private equity, 
however, is still an inefficient form of financing compared with potential lower-cost solutions. 
Ways will be found  through  financial engineering  to provide  private entities with  the  ad- 
vantages  of  the  public  market—risk  sharing,  liquidity,  and   pricing  signals— while  
retaining  the  advantages  of  the  private  market—lower  disclosure  and agency costs. Financial 
 engineering  will foster  the growth  of  the  private cor- poration, and convert entities into 
alternative forms.
Many firms hedge interest rate movements, foreign currency exposures, or commodity price exposures. 
Firms will learn to use stock-index options or fu- tures to reduce  their risk exposures. The  firm 
can reduce  the beta of its own stock  by hedging  stock-market  risks. Moreover,  with  this 
approach,  the firm does  not  have  to  target  risks. It  can just  hedge  its own  market  risks 
or  other factor risks, or  the general stock-market  risk that affect its stock price. This re- 
duces the  economic  risks of  the firm  to firm-specific  risks,  or  residual  risks, and  
reduces the need for equity to cushion adverse outcomes.
I believe that the corporate form we know today will not  be long-lived. With
more  knowledge  and  a  better  understanding  of  the  power  of  financial  en- gineering  and  
of  how  to  reduce  asymmetric  information  costs,  the  costs of using  financial  engineering  
solutions  will  continue  to  fall.  As  more  firms learn  how to use  these solutions, their 
profits will be enhanced  and more in- vestment will follow the increase in demand. Risk management 
 is only a step in the direction of producing synthetic entities.
The  firm of the future might be an organizational form far different from those used today. Some 
entities, such as electricity  producers, aircraft manu- factures and  users,  natural  resource  
producers  and  users,  and  financial  ser- vice firms already are deciding what services to 
produce and what risks to re-

Myron  A.  Scholes                                               I5l

tain; what services to rent and what risks to shed, based on their perceived competitive advantage.
Financial  service  firms are building  large capital  bases to make markets around the world, and 
to put into practice specific knowledge to engineer so- lutions for their clients on a global basis 
and to create long-lived  derivative products for issue in their own names. Their profits are made 
from modeling and understanding  markets and providing value-added solutions for clients. A 
risk-management system provides information  on what risks to keep and what  risks  to hedge. In 
addition,  it provides  a way  to reduce  information asymmetries between senior management and 
employees, and to provide the incentive  system  necessary  to align  the interests of the 
employees  and  the firm's shareholders.
A risk-management system must also address how a financial service firm handles crisis situations. 
To preserve its franchise, a financial service firm can insure against adverse price movements or 
unforeseen contingencies by hold- ing working capital as a reserve against adverse liquidity needs. 
Alternatively, the financial service firm might be able to buy options from  the exchange markets 
or from the OTC markets (for example, lines of credit) at a lower dead-weight cost to insure 
against extreme price movements that could ad- versely affect its business. Maybe regulatory 
bodies, in effect, provide lower cost insurance.
Because of tax and regulatory costs, financial-service firms might find that working capital held 
in corporate form is too expensive relative to other al- ternatives. For example, clients of 
financial service firms hold large quantities of passive wealth in mutual funds, insurance 
companies, pension funds, and various trusts as investment vehicles for individual savings. 
Financial-service firms and other entities must hold working capital to insure against adverse 
contingencies. With options and other forms of contingent capital arrange- ments, it will become 
possible to mobilize the capital in these client passive in- vestment  vehicles and reduce  the 
dead-weight  costs of the current system. This could lower the cost of capital of financial service 
firms and the cost of providing financial services to their client base.
Once again, information  and financial technology will expand to reduce the costs of information  
asymmetries. Understanding  and developing  mar- kets for credit derivatives, understanding  the 
implications of contingent ca- pital options under asymmetric information, and understanding what 
is the most efficient mechanisms to hold capital will change organizational forms, the boxes, and 
blur the distinctions between  debt and equity, corporations and partnerships, and the demanders 
and suppliers of capital. The evolution of option technology will open up entire new institutional 
structures.

5. CONCLUSION
We started in the Past, the age of innocence, and we progressed to the Pres- ent, the age of 
understanding, growth, and maturation. The growth has not been without pains. A considerable amount 
of additional understanding and

152                 Economic  Sciences  1997

development awaits the users of the derivative technology in the Future—the age of excitement. 
Advances in communications and computing technology will allow for greater reduction  in asymmetric 
information  costs. The  future growth  of innovation  using  the option-pricing technology will be 
as great or greater  than  in  the  past. Organizational forms will change  dramatically in a 
global environment.  The exchange industry will continue  to grow;  the OTC industry will continue  
to grow, and  the  research  necessary by academics and practitioners  to understand  and  to 
foster  the evolution  will  be so great  that the  academic  industry  will  become  more  
important  than  in  the  past.  The need for highly trained and skilled practitioners that 
understand  the technol- ogy will continue to increase on a global basis. None of these three 
industries has retained  its past form  and  none will  retain  its present form. These  eco- nomic 
organizational forms always will evolve and respond  to the demands of economic agents.
The  capital  asset  pricing  model,  arbitrage  and  capital  structure  models, and  the 
efficient  markets hypothesis introduced  me to key finance  concepts that were the genesis of our  
development of the  option-pricing technology. In a  world  of  information  asymmetries,  
derivative  instruments  provide  lower cost solutions  to financial  contracting  problems  in  a  
dynamic  environment and  these lower-cost solutions enhance economic efficiency.



REFERENCES
Bachelier,  L., 1900,  “Théorie  de la Spéculation”,  Annales  de  I Ecole  Normale  Superieure,  
3, Paris: Gauthier-Villers. (English translation in Cootner, P. H., ed. The Random Character of 
Stock Market Prices, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1964) .
Banz, R.W., and M. H. Miller, 1978, “Prices for State-Contingent Claims: Some Estimates
and Applications,”journal of Business 51, pp. 653—672.
Bernstein, P. L., 1992, Capital  Ideas:  The Improbable  Origins  of Modern  Wall  Street,  New 
York:
Free Press.
Black, F. and M. Scholes, 1973, “The Pricing of Options and Corporate Liabilities,” ;foiirtia/
of Political Economy,  81, 637—654.
Black, F., and M. Scholes, 1972, “The Valuation of Option Contracts and a Test of Market 
Efficiency,”Journal ofFinance, May, pp. 399—417.
Black, F., M. Jensen  and M. S. Scholes, 1972,  “The  Capital  Asset Pricing  Model: Some Empirical 
Tests,” Studies  in  the Theory of Capital Markets, Edited by     Jensen,Praeger, Inc. Black, F., 
1975, “Fact and Fantasy in the Use of Options,” Financial  Analysts Journal 31, pp.
3     1, 61—72.
Black, F., 1976, “The Pricing of Commodity Contracts.” The journal ofFinancial Economics 3, 
pp.167-179.
Black,  F., 1989,  “How We  Game  Up  with  the  Option  Formula.”  The  Journal  of  Portfolio 
Management,  Winter, pp. 4—8.
Breeden, D.T., and R. H. Litzenbeger, 1978, “Prices of State-Contingent Claims Implicit in Option 
Prices,”Journal of Business 51, pp. 621—651.
Brennan, M J   and E. S. Schwartz, 1979, “A Continuous Time Approach to the Pricing of 
Bonds,”Journal of Banking and Finance 3, pp. 133—155.
Cootner, P. H. (ed.) 1964, The Random Character of Stock Market Prices. MIT Press.
Cox, J.C.  and  S.A.  Ross,  1976,  “The  Valuation  of  Options  for  Alternative  Stochastic 
Processes,”Journal ofFinancial Economics 3, pp. 145-166.

Myron  A.  Scholes                                                 153

Cox, J. C., S. A. Ross and M. Rubinstein, 1979, “Option Pricing: A Simplified Approach,”
Journal o/Financial Economics 7, pp. 229—263.
Fama, E., 1965, “The Behavior of Stock Prices,”Journal of Business 37, pp. 34—105.
Froot, K,  D. Scharfstein, and J. Stein, 1993, “Risk Management: Coordinating  Gorporate Investment 
and Financing Policies,” The Journal ofFinance 48, pp. 1629—1658.
Galai,  D., 1975,  “Pricing  of  Options  and  the Efficiency  of  the Chicago  Board  Options 
Exchange, Ph.D. dissertation, University of Chicago.
Geske, R., 1979, “The Valuation of Compound Options,"Journal of Financial Economics 7, pp. 63—81.
Harrison, J. M., and D. Kreps, 1979, “Martingales and Arbitrage in Multiperiod Securities 
Markets,”Journal ofEconomic  Theory 2, pp. 381—408.
Jensen, M. C. 1968, “The Performance of Mutual Funds in the Period 1945—64,”/ourna/ o/
Finance 23, pp. 389—419.
Lintner  J  1965, “The Valuation of Risk Assets and the Selection of Risky Investments in Stock 
Portfolios and Capital Budgets,” his      ofEconomics  and Statistics 47, pp. 768—83.
Magrabe, W., 1978, “The Value of an Option to Exchange One Asset for Another,” Journal ofFinance 
33, pp. I 77—186.
Markowitz, H., 1952, “Portfolio Selection,”;fourno/ ofFinance 7, pp. 77—91.
Markowitz,  H., 1959,  “Portfolio  Selection:  Efficient  Diversification of Investment,”  New 
York: Wiley.
Merton, R. C., 1973,  “Theory  of Rational  Option  Pricing,”  Bell  journal  of  Economic  and 
Management  Sciences 4, pp. 141—83.
Merton, R.C., 1974,  “On the Pricing of Corporate  Debt: The Risk Structure  of Interest
Rates,”Journal ofFinance,  29, pp. 449—470.
Merton R.C., M. S. Scholes and M. L. Gladstein, 1978, ‘the Returns and Risk of Alternative Call 
Option Portfolio Strategies,”Journal of Business 51, pp. 183—242.
Merton R.C., M. S. Scholes and M. L. Gladstein, 1982, “A Simulation of the Returns and Risk of 
Alternative Put Options Investment Strategies,”Jottrito/ of Business 55, pp. 1—55.
Merton, R. C., 1992, “Financial Innovation and Economic Performance,”Journal ofA pplied Corporate 
Finance 4, pp. 12—22.
Merton, R. C., 1992a, “Continuous-Time Finance,” (revised edition), Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwell.
Miller,  M. H., 1988,  “The  Modigliani-Miller Propositions  after  Thirty  Years,” Journal of 
Economic Perspectives  2, pp. 99-120
Miller, M.H., 1997, Mwton differ on Deriuatiues,  New York, N.Y: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Parkinson, 
M., 1977, “Option Pricing: The American Put,” Journa/  o/ Buttress  50, pp. 21—
36.
Richard, S., 1978, “An Arbitrage Model of the Term Structure of Interest Rates,”/ourrio/ o/
Finanoal Economics 6, pp. 33-57.
Roll, R., 1970, The Behavior oflnterest Rates: The Application of the E fficient Market Model to 
U.S. Tieasur f Bills, Basic Books, NY.
Ross, S. A., 1976, “Options and efficiency,” Quarterly Journal ofEconomics  90, pp. 75-89. 
Rubinstein, M. E., 1976, “The Valuation of Uncertain Income Streams and the Pricing of
Options,” Bell Journal ofEconomics 1,  pp. 407—425.
Samuelson,  P. A. and R. C. Merton, 1969,  “A Complete  Model  of Warrant Pricing  that Maximizes 
Utility,” Industrial Management  his     10, pp. 17-46.
Samuelson,  P.  A., 1965a,  “Rational  Theory  of   Warrant  Pricing,”  Industrial  Management
his     6, pp. 13—31.
Samuelson,  P. A., 1965b,  “Proof  that Properly  Anticipated  Prices Fluctuate  Randomly,”
Industrial Management  Reuinu 6, pp. 41—49.
Scholes, M. S., 1972, “The Market for Securities: Substitution Versus Price Pressure and the 
Effects of Information on Share Prices,"Journal of Business 45, pp. 179—211.
Scholes, M. S., 1976, “Taxes and the Pricing of Options,"/ourtinf ofFinance 31, pp. 319—32. 
Scholes, M. S., and M. A. Wolfson, 1992, Taxes  and  Business  $trategf:  A Planning AJroach,
Englewood Cliffs, Nj: Prentice Hall.

154                               Economic  Sciences  1997

Scholes, M. S., 1995, ‘The Future of Futures,” Ask Management Problems  U   Solutions, Edited by W. 
H. Beaver and G. Parker, McGraw-Hill. pp. 349—369.
Scholes,  M.  S.  1996,  “Financial  Infrastructure  and  Economic  Growth, ”  TR  Mosaic   of 
Economic  Mowth, Edited by R. Landau, Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Scholes, M. S., 1996a, “Global Financial Markets, Derivative Securities and Systemic Risks, ”
journal of Risk  and  Uncertainfi 12, pp. 271 —286.
Sharpe,  W.  F.,  1964,  “Capital  Asset  Pricing:  A  Theory  of  Market  Equilibrium  Under 
Conditions of Risk,”Journal ofFinance 19, pp. 425—42.
Sharpe, W.F., 1978, Investments,  Englewood Cliffs, NJ  Prentice Hall.
Smith,  C.W.,  and  R.M. Stulz, 1985,  ‘the Determinants  of  a Firm's Hedging  Policies,”
Journal ofFinancial and Qyantitative  Analysis 20, pp. 391—405.
Stulz, R. M., 1996, “Rethinking Risk Management,”Journo/ ofAJ/ied  Cm'porate Finance 9, pp.
8-24.
Vasicek, O. A., 1977, “An Equilibrium Characterization of the Term Structure,” Journal  of 
Financial Economics 5, pp. 177—188.
