Transaction Cost Economics:
The Natural Progression*1

Prize Lecture, December 8, 2009
by
Oliver E. Williamson
University of California, Berkeley, CA, U.S.A.




The research program on which I and others have been working has been
variously described as the “economics of governance,” the “economics of
organization,” and “transaction cost economics.” As discussed in Section 1,
governance is the overarching concept and transaction cost economics is the
means by which to breathe operational content into governance and orga-
nization. The specific issue that drew me into this research project was the
puzzle posed by Ronald Coase in 1937: What efficiency factors determine
when a firm produces a good or service to its own needs rather than
outsource? As described in Section 2, my 1971 paper on “The Vertical
Integration of Production” made headway with this issue and invited follow-
on research that would eventually come to be referred to as transaction
cost economics. The rudiments of transaction cost economics are set out in
Section 3. Puzzles and challenges that arose and would require “pushing the
logic of efficient governance to completion” are examined briefly in Section
4. Concluding remarks follow.


1. An Overview
For economists, if not more generally, governance and organization are
important if and as these are made susceptible to analysis. As described here,
breathing operational content into the concept of governance would entail
examining economic organization through the lens of contract rather than
the neoclassical lens of choice, recognizing that this was an interdisciplinary
project where economics and organization theory (and, later, aspects of the




*
   This paper has benefited from my presentation of an early draft to my colleagues and students at the
University of California, Berkeley and from subsequent discussions with Steven Tadelis. I have grave doubts
that I would have undertaken the project described herein but for (1) my interdisciplinary training at
Carnegie (where economics and organization theory were joined), (2) my experience as Special Economic
Assistant to the Head of the Antitrust Division at the U.S. Department of Justice (which revealed the need
within the antitrust enforcement agencies to bring economics and organization theory together), and (3) the
opportunity to work these issues through with my students at the University of Pennsylvania when I resumed
teaching. (Teaching is learning, especially if the students buy into the project.)



                                                                                                     455


law) were joined, and introducing hitherto neglected transaction costs into
the analysis. A predictive theory of economic organization was the object.
The puzzle of vertical integration was an obvious place to start.

1.1 Governance
Whereas textbook micro-economic theory was silent on the concept of good
governance, John R. Commons, who was a leading institutional economist
during the first half of the 20th century, formulated the problem of economic
organization as follows: “The ultimate unit of activity … must contain in itself
the three principles of conflict, mutuality, and order. This unit is a transaction”
(Commons, 1932, p. 4). Commons thereafter recommended that “theories of
economics center on transactions and working rules, on problems of organi-
zation, and on the … [ways] the organization of activity is … stabilized” (1950,
p. 21).
   This conception of economics is to be contrasted with the neoclassical
resource allocation paradigm in two important respects: first, whereas
Commons viewed organization and the continuity of contractual relations
as important, the resource allocation paradigm made negligible provision
for either but focused instead on prices and output, supply and demand;
second, whereas the price theoretic approach to economics would become
the “dominant paradigm” during the 20th century (Reder, 1999, p. 43), insti-
tutional economics was mainly relegated to the history of thought because
it failed to advance a positive research agenda that was replete with predic-
tions and empirical testing (Stigler in Kitch, 1983, p. 170). Stalwarts notwith-
standing, institutional economics “ran itself into the sand.”
   This does not imply, however, that institutional economics was lacking for
good ideas. Indeed, the Commons Triple of conflict, mutuality, and order
prefigures the concept of governance as herein employed – in that gover-
nance is the means by which to infuse order, thereby to mitigate conflict and
realize mutual gain. Furthermore, the transaction is made the basic unit of
analysis.
   James Buchanan subsequently distinguished between lens of choice and
lens of contract approaches to economic organization and argued that
economics as a discipline went “wrong” in its preoccupation with the science
of choice and the optimization apparatus associated therewith (1975, p.
225). If “mutuality of advantage from voluntary exchange is… the most
fundamental of all understandings in economics” (Buchanan, 2001, p. 29),
then the lens of contract approach is an under-used perspective.
   The past 35 years have witnessed growing interest in the use of the lens
of contract, to include both theories that emphasize ex ante incentive
alignment (agency theory/mechanism-design, team theory, property rights
theory) and those for which the ex post governance of contractual relations
is where the main analytical action resides. Transaction cost economics is
an ex post governance construction, with emphasis on those transactions
to which Commons called attention – namely those for which continuity (or
breakdown) of the exchange relation is of special importance. How did

456


the attributes of such transactions differ from the ideal transaction, in both
law and economics, of simple market exchange (where no such continuity
 relation was implied)? What were the governance ramifications?
Answers to these queries would entail reformulating the problem of
economic organization in comparative contractual terms by (1) naming the
key attributes with respect to which transactions differ, (2) describing the
clusters of attributes that define alternative modes of governance, of which
markets and hierarchies are two, (3) joining these parts by appealing to the
efficient alignment hypothesis, wherein (4) predictions would be derived to
which empirical tests would be applied and (5) public policy ramifications
would be worked up. Antecedent to the foregoing, the contact-relevant
attributes of human actors would be named and explicated.

1.2 Organization
Whereas the neoclassical theory of the firm treated the firm as a black box
for transforming inputs into outputs according to the laws of technology,
this was not, as Harold Demsetz observed, an all-purpose construction. It is a
“mistake to confuse the firm of [neoclassical] economic theory with its real-
world namesake. The chief mission of neoclassical economics is to under-
stand how the price system coordinates the use of resources, not the inner
workings of real firms” (1983, p. 377).
   Although Demsetz did not make the case that economics and organization
theory should be joined in a combined effort to understand firm and
market organization of a real world kind, that is nevertheless the research
need and opportunity as I perceived it – in no small measure because of my
training (1960–63) in the Ph.D. program at Graduate School of Industrial
Administration, Carnegie Mellon University. This remarkable program
in interdisciplinary social science made the case that organization theory
should both inform and be informed by economics.1 Herbert Simon, James
March, and Richard Cyert played especially important roles2 in putting this
across. Considerations of bounded rationality, the specification of goals,3
intertemporal regularities (wherein organization takes on “a life of its own”),
the critical importance of adaptation, the reliance within the operating parts
on routines, and, more generally, the “architecture of complexity” were all
basic concepts that would prove to be pertinent to an understanding of
incomplete contracting and complex organization. Had the governance of
contractual relations come under study at Carnegie, there is no question that
this would have been examined in an interdisciplinary way.
1 Jacques Dreze speaks for me, and, I am sure, for many others in his statement that “Never since [my visit
  to Carnegie] have I experienced such intellectual excitement” (1995, p. 123). Nobel Laureates in economics
  from the small group of faculty and students at Carnegie include Herbert Simon, Franco Modigliani,
	Merton Miller, Robert Lucas, Edward Prescott, and Finn Kydland.
2	Classic books by Carnegie faculty that feature economics and organization theory include Models of Man
  (Simon, 1957b), Organizations (March and Simon, 1958), and the Behavioral Theory of the Firm (Cyert
  and March, 1963).
3	One way to introduce organizational considerations is to change the objective function of the firm by
  supplanting the neoclassical assumption of profit maximization with various forms of “managerial
  discretion” – such as sales maximization (Baumol, 1959), growth maximization (Marris, 1964), or expense
  preference (Williamson, 1964). These efforts to introduce “realism in motivation” yielded few predictions
  and resulted in little empirical testing.


                                                                                                      457


1.3 Transaction costs
Ronald Coase, in his classic 1937 paper on “The Nature of the Firm,” was
the first to bring the concept of transaction costs to bear on the study of
firm and market organization. The youthful Coase (then 27 years old)
uncovered a serious lapse in the accepted textbook theory of firm and market
organization. Upon viewing firm and market as “alternative methods of
coordinating production” (1937, p. 388), Coase observed that the decision
to use one mode rather than the other should not be taken as given (as was
the prevailing practice) but should be derived. Accordingly, Coase advised
economists that they needed (1937, p. 389):

    …to bridge what appears to be a gap in [standard] economic theory
    between the assumption (made for some purposes) that resources are
    allocated by means of the price mechanism and the assumption (made for
    other purposes) that that allocation is dependent on the entrepreneur-
    coordinator. We have to explain the basis on which, in practice, this
    choice between alternatives is effected.

The missing concept was “transaction cost.”
   The lapse to which Coase referred had little immediate effect (Coase,
1988, p. 23) and failed to take hold over the next 20 years, during which
period the implicit assumption of zero transaction costs went unchallenged.
Two important articles in the 1960s would upset this state of affairs. Upon
pushing the logic of zero transaction costs to completion, the unforeseen
implications of this standard assumption were displayed for all to see.
   The first demonstration was Coase’s 1960 article on “The Problem of
Social Cost.” Upon reformulating the externality problem in contractual
terms and pushing the logic of zero transaction cost reasoning to comple-
tion, an astonishing result materialized: “Pigou’s conclusion (and that of
most economists of that era) that some kind of government action (usually
the imposition of taxes) was required to restrain those whose actions had
harmful effects on others (often termed negative externalities)” was incorrect
(Coase, 1992, p. 717).4 That is because if transaction costs are zero then the
parties to tort transactions will costlessly bargain to an efficient result which-
ever way property rights are assigned at the outset. In that event, the emperor
really did have no clothes: externalities and frictions of other kinds would
vanish. That being preposterous, the real message was this: “study the world
of positive transaction costs” (Coase, 1992, p. 717).5 Kenneth Arrow’s 1969


4 Even the Chicago School, which had grave reservations with over-reaching uses of externality arguments,
  was resistant to Coase’s claims that externalities vanished under zero transaction cost conditions. For a
  discussion of Coase vs. Chicago, see Edmund Kitch (1983, pp. 220–221).
5	Not everyone agrees. Some economists take the “Coase Theorem” – the first 15 pages of Coase (1960) −
  to imply that costless renegotiation accurately describes contracting in practice. However, the following
  29 pages in Coase (1960) reveal that the zero transaction cost assumption is not only wrong but undermines
  our understanding of complex economic phenomena. Express provision for positive transaction costs
  would thereafter need to be made if externalities and other real-world contractual phenomena are to be
  accurately understood. Coase reaffirmed that this was his purpose in his Nobel Prize Lecture (1992,
  p. 712).


458


examination of “The Organization of Economic Activity: Issues Pertinent to
the Choice of Market versus Non-market Allocation” likewise revealed a need
to make a place for positive transaction costs, both with respect to market
failures and in conjunction with intermediate product market contracting:
“the existence of vertical integration may suggest that the costs of operating
competitive markets are not zero, as is usually assumed in our theoretical
analysis” (1969, p. 48).
   But whereas pushing the logic of zero transaction costs to completion
would reveal the need to make provision for positive transaction costs, there
were three problems. First, upon opening the “black box” of firm and market
organization and looking inside, the black box turned out to be Pandora’s
Box: positive transaction costs were perceived to be everywhere. That would
prove to be a curse, in that some form of transaction cost could be invoked to
explain any condition whatsoever after the fact, as a result of which appeal to
transaction costs acquired a “well deserved bad name” (Fischer, 1977, p. 322).
Second, it does not suffice to show that some types of transaction costs are
demonstrably great. Unless these costs differ among modes (say, as between
markets and hierarchies), such a demonstration lacks comparative contrac-
tual significance. Third, transaction costs that pass the test of comparative
contractual significance need to be embedded in a conceptual framework
from which predictions can be derived and empirically tested. The unmet
need was to focus attention on key features and provide operational content
for the intriguing concept of positive transaction costs.


2. The Vertical Integration of Production
What I have referred to as the “Carnegie Triple” (Williamson, 1996, p.
25) is this: be disciplined; be interdisciplinary; have an active mind. Being
disciplined means to take your core discipline seriously and work at it on
its own terms. Being interdisciplinary means to appeal to the contiguous
social sciences ­– if and as the phenomena under study cross disciplinary
lines. Having an active mind entails asking the question, “What is going on
here?” rather than pronouncing “This is the law here.”6 The Carnegie Triple
would serve me well when I named industrial organization as my field – even
though I had never taken an industrial organization course at Carnegie (or
elsewhere), – when I went on the job market.
   Coase described the leading industrial organization textbooks in the 1960s
as “applied price theory” (1972, p. 62) – with which I agree, but with a caveat:
the structure-conduct-performance paradigm also played an important role
in the “Harvard School” approach to the field. The organization of markets
(especially with respect to the number and size distribution of firms and the
condition of entry) thus figured prominently, but the organization of firms
was ignored. Because firms were production functions for transforming


6 For a discussion of these distinctions, see Roy D’Andrade (1986).


                                                                            459


inputs into outputs according to the laws of technology, the IO public policy
lesson was this: except as contracting practices and organizational structures
had a physical or technical basis, nonstandard and unfamiliar forms of
contract and organization were regarded as deeply problematic and
presumptively anticompetitive.7
   By contrast with this one-sided interpretation of deviations from the
norm under the prevailing IO orientation, the Carnegie perspective on
contractual and organizational variety was that such could also serve
efficiency purposes. This difference in perspectives would forcefully register
when I served in 1966–67 as the Special Economic Assistant to the Head of
the Antitrust Division of the U.S. Department of Justice, especially when I
was asked to comment on an early draft of the Schwinn brief. The issue was
one of vertical market restrictions and the brief advanced the argument that
the franchise restrictions imposed by the bicycle manufacturer Schwinn
on its (nonexclusive) franchisees were anticompetitive. My view was more
cautious. Not only was it unclear to me that the restrictions had anticompeti-
tive effects, but a case could be made that the restrictions in question served
the purpose of preserving the integrity of the franchise system – additionally
or instead (Williamson, 1985, pp. 183–189). Alas, the principal architects
of the Schwinn brief viewed the case as an opportunity to apply the “then
prevailing thinking of the economics profession on restricted distribution”
(Posner, 1977, p. 1). This anticompetitive interpretation succeeded in argu-
ments before the U.S. Supreme Court.8
   By reason of what I perceived to be truncated and defective reasoning
with Schwinn and other cases,9 I decided to revisit vertical integration and
vertical market restrictions when I resumed teaching at the University of
Pennsylvania. The graduate students and I worked our way through the
literature and, some very good papers notwithstanding (Fellner, 1947;
McKenzie, 1951; Stigler, 1951), satisfied ourselves that organizational
economies played no significant role. I therefore decided to revisit vertical
integration from a combined economics and organization theory
perspective.
   My paper on “The Vertical Integration of Production: Market Failure
Considerations” differed from orthodoxy in the following respects: I (1)
examined economic organization through the lens of contract rather than
the orthodox lens of choice, (2) described cognition in terms of bounded
rationality, on which account all complex contracts are incomplete, (3) made
provision for strategic behavior (defection from the spirit of cooperation)


7	Coase (1972, p. 67) described the prevailing monopoly predilection as follows: One important result of
  this preoccupation with the monopoly problem is that if an economist finds something – a business practice
  of one sort or other – that he does not understand, he looks for a monopoly explanation. And as in
  this field we are very ignorant, the number of ununderstandable practices tends to be rather large, and the
  reliance on a monopoly explanation, frequent.
8	Interestingly, the Supreme Court effectively reversed Schwinn a decade later as the limits of “prevailing
  thinking” became increasingly clear.
9	I do not, however, mean to suggest that my disagreements were common. The leadership and staff in the
	Antitrust Division in the late 1960s were superlative.


460


when an outsourced good or service experienced disturbances for which
the stakes are great, (4) treated adaptation as the main efficiency purpose of
economic organization, and (5) distinguished between investments in generic
assets and specific assets, where a bilateral dependency relation between
supplier and buyer stages was ascribed to the latter. Taken together, the
argument comes down to this: efficient intermediate product market
exchange is usually well served by simple market contracting if the assets
are generic; but the advantage shifts to hierarchy as bilateral dependency
(and the resulting risk of costly maladaptations) builds up by reason of asset
specificity and outlier disturbances.
   Although I initially regarded this paper as a stand-alone effort to solve
the puzzle of the boundaries of the firm and expand our understanding of
vertical integration, it turned out that vertical integration would become a
paradigm for the study of complex contract and economic organization. The
combination of incomplete contracts, bilateral dependency (contingent on
asset specificity), and defection from the norm of coordinated adaptation
when a contract experiences significant disturbances (for which the
stakes are great) had application to a wide range of phenomena that were
interpreted as variations on a theme.
   The initial trick was to think contractually, which for many phenomena
was easy but for others required that the phenomenon be reformulated in
contracting terms. This, however, was merely the first step. The key concepts
needed to be operationalized; a predictive theory needed to be worked up;
and, as gaps and omissions arose, the logic of positive transaction costs would
need to be pushed to completion. The first two are addressed in Section 3
and the last in Section 4.


3. The Rudiments
Upon realizing that this approach to the study of economic organization had
broad application, the basic mechanisms and the underlying logic needed
to be worked up more systematically. The rudiments are described in three
clusters: key conceptual moves; key operational moves; and applications.
Common to all three clusters is the need to examine economic organization
at a more microanalytic level of analysis, which is consistent with Simon’s
observation that (1984, p. 40):

   In the physical sciences, when errors of measurement and other noise
   are found to be of the same order of magnitude as the phenomena
   under study, the response is not to try to squeeze more information
   out of the data by statistical means; it is instead to find techniques
   for observing the phenomena at a higher level of resolution. The
   corresponding strategy for economics is obvious: to secure new kinds
   of data at the micro level.

What follows is a very compact summary.

                                                                           461


3.1 Conceptual moves
The basic moves here are to elaborate upon (1) the attributes of human
actors and (2) adaptation and to introduce (3) contract laws (plural).
   Human actors. If “Nothing is more fundamental in setting our research
agenda and informing our research methods than our view of the nature of
the human beings whose behavior we are studying” (Simon, 1985, p. 303),
then social scientists are challenged to name the cognitive, self-interest, and
other attributes of human actors on which their analyses rest.
   The cognitive assumption that Simon has characterized as his “lodestar”
is bounded rationality (1991, p. 86), which he describes as behavior that is
“intendedly rational, but only limitedly so” (1957a, p. xxiv). Human actors,
so described, are neither hyperrational nor irrational but are attempting
effectively to cope with complex contracts that are incomplete.
   Incompleteness notwithstanding, transaction cost economics also makes
provision for “feasible foresight,” as reflected in George Schultz’s remarks
about how his “training in economics has had a major influence on the way
I think about public policy tasks, even when they have no particular relation
to economics. Our discipline makes one think ahead, ask about indirect
consequences, take note of variables not directly under consideration”
(1995, p. 1). This is a recurrent theme in the discussion in Section 4 of
pushing the logic to completion. I merely observe here that many economists
and others within the social science community (Michels [1911] 1962; March
and Simon, 1958) practice feasible foresight, although this is an under-used
perspective.
   My interpretation of Simon’s description of self-interest seeking as “frailty
of motive” (Simon, 1985, p. 303) is that most people will do what they say
(and some will do more) most of the time without self-consciously asking
whether the effort is justified by expected discounted net gains. If they slip, it
is a normal friction and often a matter of bemusement. The proposition that
routines describe the behavior of most individuals most of the time contem-
plates (non-strategic) benign behavior.
   But while accurate descriptions of what is going on “most of the time”
are plainly essential, much of what is interesting about human behavior in
general and organizations in particular has reference not to routines but to
exceptions. Indeed, once good routines have been developed, the chief role
of management is to deal with exceptions. In the context of outsourcing,
such exceptions arise from contractual incompleteness in combination with
consequential disturbances that push the parties to an interfirm agreement
off of the contract curve. Strategic considerations – which arise by reason of
information asymmetries, bilateral dependencies, weaknesses of property
rights, and the costliness of court enforcement of contracts – will now come
into play if, rather than mere frailty of motive, opportunism is the operative
condition.
   Adaptations. Both the organization theorist Chester Barnard and the
economist Friedrich Hayek took adaptation to be the main purpose of
economic organization, but with differences. Finding little in the social

462


sciences that informed the study of internal organization (hierarchy) as he
had experienced it, Barnard undertook to craft the relevant concepts him-
self in his path breaking book, The Functions of the Executive (1938), where he
focused on coordinated adaptation as accomplished in a “conscious, deliberate,
purposeful” way through the use of administration (Barnard, 1938, chap.
1). Hayek, by contrast, celebrated the “marvel of the market” (Hayek, 1945,
p. 527) where autonomous adaptations are implemented spontaneously in
response to changes in relative prices.
   The challenge for the economics of governance was to recognize that
adaptations of both kinds are important and to make selective provision
for each. Rather, therefore, than be trapped in the old ideological divide
between markets or hierarchies, transaction cost economics treats the two
as alternative modes of governance, markets and hierarchies, both of which
have distinctive roles to play in a well-working economy. The heretofore
maligned mode of hierarchy is now awarded co-equal status with the marvel
of the market, the object being to deploy each appropriately.
   Contract laws (plural). As against the standard practice of there being one
all-purpose law of contract, Karl Llewellyn, who was a leader in the Legal
Realism Movement in the United States, moved beyond the concept of
contract as legal rules (with court enforcement) by introducing the idea
of “contract as framework,” predominantly as implemented by private
ordering. Specifically, the “major importance of legal contract is to pro-
vide … a framework which almost never accurately indicates real working
relations, but which affords a rough indication around which such relations
vary, an occasional guide in cases of doubt, and a norm of ultimate appeal
when the relations cease in fact to work” (1931, pp. 736–737). This last
condition is important, in that recourse to the courts for purposes of
ultimate appeal serves to delimit threat positions. The more elastic concept
of contract as framework nevertheless supports a (cooperative) exchange
relation over a wider range of contractual disturbances than would a strict
legal rules construction. As discussed below in conjunction with pushing the
logic to completion, the contract law regime of “forbearance” has similar
purposive origins.
   Suffice it to observe here that adaptations (of autonomous and coordinated
kinds) are taken to be the central purpose of organization; and viable modes
of governance differ in contract law respects.

3.2 Key operational moves
The three key operational moves are to (1) name the attributes of the unit
of analysis, (2) do the same for modes of governance, and (3) advance the
efficient alignment hypothesis.
   Unit of analysis. Various units of analysis have been proposed for studying
organizations, yet efforts to name the defining attributes of proposed units
are rare. The unit of analysis in the transaction cost economics setup is the
transaction – as recommended by Commons (1932) and as is implicit in
Coase (1 937, 1960). For transaction cost economizing purposes, the critical

                                                                           463


dimensions of transactions are complexity, the condition of asset specificity,
and the disturbances to which a transaction is subject. As among these three,
the attributes of transactions that have been most important to an under-
standing of the governance of contractual relations are the conditions of
asset specificity and outlier disturbances for which unprogrammed
adaptations are needed.10
   Although Jacob Marschak had made perceptive reference to specialized
human and locational conditions and observed that “the problem of unique
or imperfectly standardized goods… had been neglected in the textbooks”
(1968, p. 14), the wide reach of asset specificity – to include physical, human,
site specific, dedicated, brand name capital, and episodic (or temporal)
forms – would become evident only as the concerted study of transaction cost
economics got underway. Relevant in this connection is that different types
of hazards accrue to different forms of asset specificity, which variations have
significant organizational ramifications. Whatever the particulars, the basic
regularity that is associated with transactions that are supported by invest-
ments in specific assets is that these assets cannot be redeployed to alternative
uses and users without loss of productive value (Williamson, 1971, 1975,
1976, 1985; Klein, Crawford, and Alchian, 1978).
   Intertemporal considerations are relevant in this connection. Thus
although some conditions of asset specificity are evident from the outset,
others evolve during contract implementation. (Human asset specificity that
arises because of learning by doing is an example of the latter.) Whatever
the source of the condition of asset specificity, the condition of nonrede-
ployability, to which I refer above, has the effect of transforming what may
have been a large numbers bidding competition at the outset into a small
numbers exchange relationship during the period of the contract and at the
contract renewal interval. Such transformations compromise the efficacy of
simple market exchange, which is supplanted by longer term contracts (as
supported by credible commitments) or, in the limit, by unified ownership of
successive stages with recourse to hierarchy.11




10	Note, however, that complexity plays a crucial role in the following respect: all complex contracts are
   incomplete by reason of bounded rationality. Not all incompleteness, however, is consequential. I associate
   consequential incompleteness mainly with outlier disturbances for which the stakes are great (because the
   parties are bilaterally dependent), on which account asset specificity and uncertainty are the defining
   features. Inconsequential incompleteness is that range of disturbances over which Llewellyn’s “contract as
   framework” can be presumed to work well, often with the support of credible contracting mechanisms.
	It is also, however, useful to recognize that incompleteness becomes more severe as the number of features
   of a transaction (precision, linkages, compatibility) across which adaptations are needed increases and
   as the number of consequential disturbances that impinge on these features increases, which disturbances
   increase with the length of the contract.
11	Note that because asset specificity is a design variable, the good or service to be delivered could be
   redesigned so as to reduce asset specific features, albeit at a sacrifice in performance of the good or service
   in question (Riordan and Williamson, 1985). Note also that whereas the emphasis on individual (bilateral)
   transactions serves the purpose of analytical simplicity, groups of related transactions sometimes pose
   sequencing problems. This introduces systems considerations for which real time coordination complexities
   need to be factored in. (See note 20, infra.)


464


   Modes of governance. Markets and hierarchies are the two polar modes to
which Coase referred in his 1937 paper and are the governance alternatives
on which I focus in my paper on the vertical integration of production. This
is wholly in the spirit of the first precept of pragmatic methodology: keep
it simple (Solow, 2001, p. 111; Friedman, 1997, p. 196). It is noteworthy,
however, that transaction cost economics has subsequently introduced the
hybrid mode (Williamson, 1991; Menard, 1996) and has furthermore moved
beyond intermediate product market contracting to interpret a wide range
of commercial (and some noncommercial) phenomena as variations on a
theme.
   The critical dimensions for describing alternative modes of governance,
of which markets and hierarchies are two, are incentive intensity, which is
strong in autonomous stages that appropriate their streams of net receipts
and is weak under cost-plus reward schemes; administrative command and con-
trol, which is strong if successive stages are under unified ownership and are
subject to coordination and dispute resolution by a common “boss”, and
contract law regime, which is strong under a legal rules (court ordered)
contract law regime but is weak if disputes between successive stages are
settled by private ordering, where the firm is its own final court of ultimate
appeal).
   Assuming that each of these three dimensions of governance can take
on either of these two values, weak (0) or strong (+), and that we focus on
polar modes (market and hierarchy), there are 23=8 possible combinations.
Which are the internally consistent combinations that describe market and
hierarchy? As discussed elsewhere (Williamson, 1991), the syndrome that
describes the market is strong incentive intensity, weak command and
control at the interface, and strong (legal rules) contracting. The syndrome
that describes hierarchy, by contrast, is weak incentive intensity, strong
administrative command and control at the interface, and weak contract
law regime (forbearance law). So described, market and hierarchy are polar
opposites.
   Efficient alignment. Transaction cost economics appeals to the efficient align-
ment hypothesis to predict which transactions go where – to wit, transactions,
which differ in their attributes, are aligned with governance structures, which
differ in their cost and competences, so as to effect a (mainly) transaction
cost economizing outcome. The basic prediction for generic transactions
for which asset specificity is nil and the adaptive needs can be ascertained
and implemented autonomously is that these will be procured in the
market. Such transactions correspond to the ideal transactions in both law
and economics. Transactions, by contrast, that are supported by significant
investments in transaction specific assets and are subject to incompleteness
(by reason of bounds on rationality) will experience malcoordination when
beset by significant disturbances for which defection from cooperation
can be projected as the stakes increase. Such transactions will benefit
from unified ownership and coordinated adaptations as implemented by
hierarchy.

                                                                              465


3.3 Applications
Economic theories take on added significance if and as (1) the predictions
are borne out by the data, (2) variations on a theme are worked out, and (3)
public policy ramifications accrue and are displayed.
   Empirical. Transaction cost economics both makes predictions and submits
them to empirical testing. Not only did empirical tests of transactions cost
economics number over 800 in 2006, but they have been broadly corroborative
(Macher and Richman, 2008). Indeed, “despite what almost 30 years ago may
have appeared to be insurmountable obstacles to acquiring the relevant data
[which are often primary data of a microanalytic kind], today transaction
cost economics stands on a remarkably broad empirical foundation”
(Geyskens, Steenkamp and Kumar, 2006, p. 531). There is no gainsaying that
transaction cost economics has been much more influential because of the
empirical work that it has engendered (Whinston, 2001).
   Variations on a theme. Transaction cost economics not only has many
applications within the field of industrial organization but within most
applied fields of economics as well – to include labor, public finance,
comparative economic systems, and economic development and reform.
Applications to business – to the fields of strategy, organizational behavior,
marketing, finance, operations management, and accounting – are like-
wise numerous. Numerous applications to the contiguous social sciences
(especially sociology, political science, social psychology, and aspects of the
law) have also been made. Such broad reach arises because any problem that
arises as or can be reformulated as a contracting problem can be examined
to advantage in transaction cost economizing terms.
   Public policy.12 Although transaction cost economics has had numerous
applications to public policy toward business (antitrust, regulation, corporate
governance) and in some degree in the study of agriculture, public health,
public bureaus, and economic development and reform, it is, in my
judgment, an under-used public policy perspective – especially in the
design of public bureaus, of which the Department of Homeland Security in
the U.S.A. is a recent example (Cohen, Cuellar, and Weingast, 2006). An ef-
ficiency assessment of feasible alternatives is too often scanted by a political
process where public bureaus are designed with reference to immediate
political purposes.


4. Pushing the Logic to Completion
Pushing the logic to completion is accomplished by combining the 2nd and
3rd precepts of pragmatic methodology – namely, “get it right” and “make
it plausible” (Solow, 2001, p. 111) Getting it right “includes translating
economic concepts into accurate mathematics (or diagrams, or words) and
making sure that further logical operations are correctly performed and


12	Applications of transaction cost economics to public policy are reported in Williamson (1985, 2003, 2008,
   2009).


466


verified” (Solow, 2001, p. 112); and plausible simple models of complex
phenomena are expected to “make sense for ‘reasonable’ or ‘plausible’
values of the important parameters” (Solow, 2001, p. 112). Also, because “not
everything that is logically consistent is credulous” (Kreps, 1999, p. 125),
fanciful constructions that lose contact with the phenomena are suspect −
especially if alternative and more veridical models yield refutable implications
that are congruent with the data. Combining precepts 2 and 3, the argument
comes down to this: push the logic to completion, as tempered by considera-
tions of feasibility.
   Pushing the logic of zero transaction cost to completion with respect to
externalities (Coase) and vertical integration (Arrow) revealed that routine
recourse to this simplifying assumption led to counterfactual predictions, as
a result of which economists and other social scientists were encouraged to
push the logic of positive transaction costs to completion – both in general and as
revealed by gaps or omissions that would become evident as the transaction
cost economics setup evolved. Four such conditions are examined here: the
impossibility of selective intervention, which bears on limits to firm size; the
concept of remediableness, which has massive public policy ramifications by
insisting on feasible, implementable solutions; credible contracting, which is
a robust concept for expanding the range within which mutual gains from
trade can be projected; and the test of scaling up to ascertain whether succes-
sive application of the simple (toy) model on which the analysis rests yields
a scaled up version that approximates the phenomenon in question. Also, I
briefly discuss the natural progression.

4.1 Selective intervention
The limits to firm size puzzle, as posed by Frank Knight (1921, 1933) and
Coase (1937), is this: Why can’t a large firm do everything that a collection of
smaller firms can do and more? Tracy Lewis answers a variant of this puzzle
as follows: because an established firm can always “use the input exactly as
the newer entrant would have used it …[and can furthermore] improve on
this by coordinating production from his new and existing inputs” the large
firm will always realize greater value (Lewis, 1983, p. 1092). Transaction
cost economics examines this argument by postulating two mechanisms –
replication and selective intervention – which, if they could be implemented,
would support the all-purpose superiority of larger firms.
   Thus suppose that two successive stages of production are combined
with the understanding that (1) the acquired stage will operate in the same
autonomous manner post-acquisition as in the pre-acquisition status (by
replication) except as (2) the acquiring stage intervenes selectively,
always but only, when expected net gains can be ascribed to coordinated
adaptations. In that event, the combined firm can never do worse (by replication)
and will sometimes do better (by selective intervention). Accordingly, more
integration is always better than less – which is to say that, upon repeated
application of this logic, everything will be organized in one large firm.
Wherein does the implementation of this logic break down?

                                                                               467


   Assuming that the buyer stage acquires the supplier stage, the four
conditions for implementing replication and selective intervention are these:
(1) the buyer stage as acquirer (owner) promises the acquired supplier that
the acquired stage will continue to appropriate its net receipts (as reduced
by overhead, maintenance, user and capital depreciation charges) in all state
realizations – thereby preserving high-powered incentives; (2) the supplier
promises to utilize the supply stage assets, the ownership of which has been
transferred to and are now owned by the buyer, with “due care”; (3) the
buyer promises always and only to exercise authority (fiat) when expected net
benefits can be ascribed to selective intervention; and (4) the buyer promises
candidly to reveal and divide the benefits that accrue to selective intervention
as stipulated in the acquisition agreement. The problem is that none of
these promises is self-enforcing. To the contrary, in the absence of three-way
common knowledge (to include a costless arbiter),13 each condition will be
compromised. Contributing factors include (1) the owner (buyer) controls
the accounting system and, within limits, can declare depreciation, transfer
prices, and benefits so as to shift net receipts to its advantage, (2) failures of
due care become known only with delay and are difficult to prove, (3) the
buyer can also falsely declare state realizations to favor its own stream of net
receipts, and (4) in consideration of the foregoing, the division of benefits
under selective intervention can be compromised. Also, (5) the political
game is now played in a larger firm that is more susceptible to bureaucratic
ploys and political positioning than in smaller firms.
   The details of this brief sketch are reported elsewhere (Williamson,
1985, Chap. 6). Suffice it to observe that the breakdowns referred to above
are often intuited by many intelligent businessmen and their lawyers, who
recognize the tradeoffs and factor them into the decision to integrate (or
not). The lesson for social scientists is that markets and hierarchies differ in
discrete structural ways and we need to come to terms with the strengths and
weaknesses of each.

4.2 Remediableness
The remediableness criterion serves as a reality check on the practice among
public policy analysts of assuming that transaction costs in the public sector
are zero. Not only is that nonsense, but standard public policy proceeded in
an asymmetric way: private sector contracting experienced market failures, by
reason of positive transaction costs, but there was no corresponding concept
for public sector failures.14 Little surprise, then, that convoluted public
policy prescriptions were often (unwittingly) anchored in asymmetric appli-
cation of zero transaction cost reasoning, of which regulation is an example
(Coase, 1964).

13 The need for three-way common knowledge, to include the arbiter, is yet another example of pushing the
   logic to completion (Williamson, 1975, pp. 21–34). The assumption that two-way common knowledge
   suffices is nonetheless widely held.
14	Albeit a caricature, “normative public policy analysis began by supposing that … policy was made by an
   omnipotent, omniscient, and benevolent dictator” (Dixit, 1996, p. 8) – which, in transaction cost terms,
    assumes the absence of implementation obstacles, bounds on rationality, and opportunism, respectively.


468


   The remediableness criterion is an effort to deal symmetrically with real
world institutions, both public and private, warts and all. The criterion is
this: an extant mode of organization for which no superior feasible form of
organization can be described and implemented with expected net gains is
presumed to be efficient (Williamson, 1996, Chap. 8).
   Because all feasible modes of organization are flawed, the feasibility
stipulation precludes all appeals to the fiction of zero transaction costs (in
any sector whatsoever – public, private, nonprofit, etc.) from the very outset.
The implementation stipulation requires that the costs of implementing a
proposed feasible alternative (one that is judged to be superior to an extant
mode in a de novo side-by-side comparison) be included in the net gain
calculus. The presumption that an extant mode is efficient if the expected
net gain is negative can nevertheless be rebutted by showing that the
obstacles to implementing an otherwise superior feasible alternative are
“unfair.”
   Fairness of both political and economic kinds come under review. Thus
whereas political obstacles that are judged to be fair in circumstances where
politics properly trumps economics (Stigler, 1992) survive, those that have
unacceptable political origins (e.g., are unfairly discriminatory) do not.
Likewise, whereas some economic obstacles, such as sunk costs that have
been incurred by the incumbent, may warrant delaying the introduction
of a superior feasible alternative, those that are judged to be unfair (e.g.,
predatory behavior) will be challenged.15
   The upshot is that the remediableness criterion is an effort to disallow
asymmetric efficiency reasoning of a zero transaction cost kind and force the
relevant efficiency issues for the making of public policy – namely, feasibility,
implementation, and rebuttal – to the top.

4.3 Credible commitments
The concept of credible threat figures prominently in the study of rivalry
(between nation states, in politics, and in business), where the main purpose
of a credible threat is to deter the use of some instruments (e.g., nuclear
weapons), thereby to deflect competition to other venues (Schelling, 1960)
or to deter the appearance of competition altogether. The use of cost
effective credible commitments to support exchange is related but different.
   The basic proposition is this: absent the use of credible commitments to
support exchange, the contractual hazards associated with many transactions
would be perceived to be excessive. Generic investments would replace
transaction specific investments if the latter pose too great a risk. Some
transactions would be taken into firms. Some would never materialize.
   Credible commitments sometimes come into place spontaneously, as
where a history of good experience with a trader leads to a positive reputation

15 To be sure, unfair obstacles to implementation may persist even after a showing that these stand in the
   way of progress. Obstacles to efficiency nevertheless invite dissent. Some can be overturned by the
   cumulative force of movements, of which the civil rights movement is an example, and others by perfecting
   definitions of unfair competition.


                                                                                                      469


effect. Often, however, credible commitments take shape as economic actors
consciously agree upon mechanisms that provide added assurance.16 These can take
the form of information disclosure and auditing mechanisms, the develop-
ment of specialized dispute settling mechanisms, whereby the parties rely
more on private ordering than court ordering (Llewellyn, 1931; Macaulay,
1963; Summers, 1969; Macneil, 1974, Galanter, 1981), and sometimes involve
creating hostages to support exchange (Williamson, 1983).17
   Credibility supports also vary with the institutional environment as among
political jurisdictions (Levy and Spiller, 1994), to which the literature on
positive political theory is relevant. Also relevant to the economics of gover-
nance is the concept of contract laws (plural), an example of which is the
concept of “forbearance law” to describe the contract law regime within
hierarchy18 (Williamson, 1991, p. 274; emphasis added):

    The implicit contract law of internal organization is that of forbearance.
    Thus, whereas courts routinely grant standing to firms should there be
    disputes over prices, the damages to be ascribed to delays, failures of
    quality, and the like, courts will refuse to hear disputes between one internal
    division and another over identical technical issues. Access to the courts
    being denied, the parties must resolve their differences internally.
    Accordingly, hierarchy is its own court of ultimate appeal.

  The concept of forbearance law regime was introduced to fill a logical gap
in the theory of governance. As with other forms of contract law, the efficacy
of forbearance law varies with the integrity of the institutional environment
(nation state) of which it is a part.

4.4 Scaling up
The object of a simple model is to capture the essence, thereby to explain
hitherto puzzling practices and make predictions that are subjected to
empirical testing. Often, however, simple models can also be “tested” with
respect to scaling up. Does repeated application of the basic mechanism out
of which the simple model works yield a result that recognizably describes
the phenomenon in question?
  The test of scaling up is usually ignored, possibly out of awareness that
scaling up cannot be done. Sometimes it is scanted, possibly in the mistaken
belief that scaling up can be accomplished easily. My position is that claims


16 The thirty-two year coal supply agreement between the Nevada Power Company and the Northwest Trading
	Company is illustrative (Williamson, 1991, pp. 272–273).
17 Efforts to enhance credibility sometimes take strange forms, presumably because the parties are unable
   to do better. Thus consider the recently unearthed tablets in Mesopotamia (dated around 1750 B.C.) which
   reveal that self-inflicted curses were used to deter the breach of treaties. One of these reads as follows:
   When you ask us for troops, we will not withhold our best forces, we will not answer you with evasions, we
   shall brandish our maces and strike down your enemy… As wasted seeds do not sprout, may my seed never
   rise, may someone else marry my wife under my eyes, and may someone else rule my country. (China Daily,
	March 22, 1988. p. 1).
18	Note that forbearance law precludes court jurisdiction over most internal decision making to which
   internal consequences accrue, but court jurisdiction does apply to externalities.


470


of real world relevance, including public policy relevance, of any proposed
theory of the firm that cannot be shown to scale up from toy model status to
approximate the phenomenon of interest (e.g., the modern corporation)
should be regarded with caution.19
   With respect to the transaction cost theory of the firm as governance
structure, the question is this: Does successive application of the make-
or-buy decision, as it is applied to individual transactions in the transaction cost
economics setup, scale up to describe something that approximates a
multi-stage firm? Note that transaction cost economics assumes that the
transactions of principal interest are those that take place at the interface
between (rather than within) technologically separable stages. Upon taking the
technological “core” as given, attention is focused as a series of separable
make-or-buy decisions – backward, forward, and lateral – to ascertain which
should be outsourced and which should be incorporated within the own-
ership boundary of the firm. So described, the firm is the inclusive set of
transactions for which the decision is to make rather than buy – which does
implement scaling up, or at least is an approximation thereto (Williamson,
1985, pp. 96–98).20

4.5 The natural progression
Transaction cost economics is sometimes criticized because it has not been
fully formalized, to which I have three responses: transaction cost econom-
ics, like many other theories, has undergone a natural progression; full
formalization is a work-in-progress; and premature formalization runs the
risk of a disconnection with the phenomena.
   Theories commonly progress from informal to pre-formal to semi-formal
to fully formal stages of development – broadly in the spirit of Thomas Kuhn
(1970). The informal stage of transaction cost economics was the literature
from the 1930s (especially Commons and Coase) where errors or omissions
in the neoclassical setup were described. Pre-formal work got underway in
the 1970s, where new concepts for reinterpreting vertical integration, vertical
market restrictions, labor market organization, franchise bidding for natural



19	Michael Jensen and William Meckling (1976) posed the question of whether their simple model of
   entrepreneurial ownership scaled up to deal with the diversely owned modern corporation. They
   conjectured that it did apply but deferred a demonstration of scaling up to a later paper. Alas, that paper
   never appeared. Jensen and Meckling nevertheless candidly conceded the need for scaling up.
20 There is, however, a caveat: scaling up, so described, does not make allowance for systems complications of
   the kind that arose in conjunction with Boeing Aircraft’s production of the 787 Dreamliner, where
   outsourcing confusion was rampant (Saunders, Peter, 2009, “Boeing CEO’s Bumpy Ride,” Wall Street
   Journal, Nov. 5. http://online.wsj.com.). With the benefit of hindsight, malcoordination among outsourced
   transactions led to costly delays which possibly could have been averted if related components for which
   real time coordination would prove to be crucial had been produced internally. The requisite apparatus to
   address the systems complications that can arise among groups of related trans actions has yet to be worked
   up within transaction cost economics.
	Applications of transaction cost economics would, however, have avoided the most serious outsourcing error
   made by Boeing: the decision to outsource the highly specialized fuselage to Vought Aircraft Industries.
   This transaction required significant investments in specific assets and would pose a series of adaptation
   problems during contract implementation (Tadelis, 2010a). Boeing subsequently rectified this condition
   by acquiring Vought (Sanders, Peter, 2009, “Boeing Takes Control of Plant,” Wall Street Journal,
   December 23, p. B2.


                                                                                                        471


monopoly, and the like were forged and the conditions for efficient align-
ment were worked out. Semi-formal work, in the 1980s and since, deals with
credible contracting, hybrid modes, the dimensionalization of transactions
and governance structures, a multiplicity of applications within business and
economics and the contiguous social sciences (to include public policy), and
extensive empirical testing. Full formalism also got underway in the 1980s
and is still in progress. The path breaking paper by Sanford Grossman and
Oliver Hart (1986) and the follow-on paper by Hart and John Moore (1990)
and others in this tradition – which deal with some types of transaction
costs (but is more often referred to as the property rights literature) – have
been very influential. Subsequent significant work by Steven Tadelis and his
co-authors (Bajari and Tadelis, 2001; Tadelis, 2002; Levin and Tadelis, 2010;
Tadelis 2010b) is likewise in progress.


5. Concluding Remarks
What I describe as the transaction cost economics project had its origins
in the puzzle posed by Coase in 1937: What explains the boundaries of the
firm? I addressed this by taking the vertical integration decision to be the
focal transaction and, upon reformulating it as a contracting problem, asked
the following question: When and why should a firm acquire a technologi-
cally separable component by outsourcing rather than producing to its own
needs – where outsourcing entails contracting out and own-production
contracting within. This question was addressed as an efficiency issue by
selectively combining economics with organization theory. Albeit intended
as a stand-alone research project, the vertical integration setup would open
windows to a wide array of economic activities that arose as or could be
reformulated in comparative contractual terms.
   With the benefit of hindsight, transaction cost economics has undergone a
natural progression. The informal stage got started in the 1930s with Coase’s
challenge to the profession that firm and market organization should be
derived rather than (as was then the practice) taken as given, to include
the suggestion that the missing concept was transaction cost. This latter was
buttressed by demonstrations (by Arrow and Coase) in the 1960s that much
of standard economics was reduced to irrelevance upon pushing the logic of
zero transaction costs to completion.
   The pre-formal stage began in the 1970s with the application of the lens
of contract/governance to vertical integration. Interfirm contracts that were
incomplete by reason of bounds on rationality would experience maladaptation
hazards if the parties were bilaterally dependent by reason of transaction
specific investments in the face of disturbances for which the stakes are
great (strategic defection). This economics of governance approach would
subsequently have wide application as other contractual phenomena were
interpreted as variations on a theme.
   The semi-formal stage gave added prominence to the defining attributes
of alternative modes of governance (market, hybrid, and hierarchy) as these

472


relate to differing adaptive needs, of autonomous and coordinated kinds,
among different transactions. A series of puzzles arose as this operationalization
effort progressed – of which the efficacy of selective intervention was one
and scaling up was another, for which the answers would be revealed by
pushing the logic of economic organizations to completion. Beginning in
the early 1980s and growing exponentially thereafter, an ambitious effort
at empirical testing got underway. Applications to public policy are likewise
numerous and growing. Fully formal research of a transaction cost
economics kind has taken shape and more is in progress.
   I conclude that selectively combining law, economics, and organization
to study the governance of contractual relations from a transaction cost
economizing perspective has been instructive; and I project that research
of this kind will continue to develop in conceptual, theoretical, empirical,
and public policy respects. Research in transaction cost economics faces an
interesting, challenging future.



References
 1.	Arrow, Kenneth J. (1969), “The Organization of Economic Activity: Issues Pertinent
    to the Choice of Market Versus Nonmarket Allocation” in The Analysis and Evaluation
    of Public Expenditure: The PPB System. Vol. 1, U.S. Joint Economic Committee, 91st Congress,
    1st Session, 59–73. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
 2. Bajari, Patrick and Steven Tadelis (2001), “Incentives Versus Transaction Costs: A
    Theory of Procurement Contracts,” RAND Journal of Economics, 32(3): 387–407.
 3. Barnard, Chester (1938), The Functions of the Executive, Cambridge: Harvard University
    Press.
 4. Baumol, W. J. (1959), Business Behavior, Value and Growth, New York: Macmillan.
 5. Ben-Porath, Yoram (1980), “The F‑Connection: Families, Friends, and Firms and the
    Organization of Exchange,” Population and Development Review, 6 (1): 1–30.
 6. Buchanan, James (1975), “A Contractarian Paradigm for Applying Economic
    Theory,” Papers and Proceedings of the Eighty-seventh Annual Meeting of the
    American Economic Association, American Economic Review, 65 (2): 225–230.
    – (2001). “Game Theory, Mathematics, and Economics,” Journal of Economic
    Methodology, 8 (1): 27–32.
 7.	Coase, Ronald H. 1937, “The Nature of the Firm,” Economica, N.S., 4(16): 386–405.
    Reprinted in The Nature of the Firm: Origins, Evolution, Development, 1991, ed. Oliver E.
    Williamson and Sidney Winter, 18–33, New York: Oxford University Press.
    – (1960), “The Problem of Social Cost,” Journal of Law and Economics, 3(1): 1–44.
    (3): 194–197.
    – (1972), “Industrial Organization: A Proposal for Research,” in Economic Research:
    Retrospect and Prospect. Vol. 3, Policy Issues and Research Opportunities in Industrial
    Organization, ed. V. R. Fuchs, 59–73, New York: National Bureau of Economic
    Research.
    – (1988), “The Nature of the Firm: Influence.” Journal of Law, Economics, and
    Organization, 4 (1): 33–47.
    – (1992), “The Institutional Structure of Production,” American Economic Review, 82
    (4): 713–719.
 8.	Cohen, Dara K., Mariano-Florentino Cuellar, and Barry R. Weingast (2006), “Crisis
    Bureaucracy: Homeland Security and the Political Design of Legal Mandates,”
    Stanford Law Review, 59(3), 673–760.


                                                                                           473


 9.	Commons, John R. (1932), “The Problem of Correlating Law, Economics, and
    Ethics,” Wisconsin Law Review, 8: 3–26.
    – (1950), The Economics of Collective Action, Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
10.	Cyert, Richard M., and James G. March (1963), A Behavioral Theory of the Firm,
    Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
11. D’Andrade, Roy (1986), “Three Scientific World Views and the Covering Law
    Model,” In Metatheory in Social Science: Pluralisms and Subjectivities, ed. Donald W. Fiske
    and Richard A. Schweder, 19–41, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
12. Demsetz, Harold (1983), “The Structure of Ownership and the Theory of the Firm,”
    Journal of Law and Economics, 26 (2): 375–390.
13. Dixit, Avinash (1996), The Making of Economic Policy: A Transaction Cost Politics
    Perspective, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
14. Drèze, Jacques (1995), “Forty Years of Public Economics – A Personal Perspective,”
    Journal of Economic Perspectives, 9 (2): 111–130.
15. Fellner, William (1947), “Prices and Wages under Bilateral Oligopoly,” Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, 61 (4): 503–532.
16. Fischer, Stanley (1977), “Long-Term Contracting, Sticky Prices, and Monetary Policy:
    Comment,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 3(3): 317–323.
17. Friedman, Milton (1997), in Snowdon, Brian and Howard Vane, “Modern
    Macroeconomics and its Evolution from a Monetarist Perspective,” Journal of Economic
    Studies, 24 (4): 191–221.
18.	Galanter, Marc (1981), “Justice in Many Rooms: Courts, Private Ordering, and
    Indigenous Law,” Journal of Legal Pluralism and Unofficial Law, 19(1): 1–47.
19.	Geyskens, Inge, Jan-Benedict E.M. Steenkamp, and Nirmalya Kumar (2006), “Make,
    Buy, or Ally: A Meta-analysis of Transaction Cost Theory,” Academy of Management
    Journal, 49 (3): 519–543.
20.	Grossman, Sanford J., and Oliver D. Hart (1986), “The Costs and Benefits of
    Ownership: A Theory of Vertical and Lateral Integration,” Journal of Political Economy,
    94(4): 691–719.
21.	Hart, Oliver and John Moore (1990), “Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm,”
    Journal of Political Economy, 98 (6): 1119–1158.
22.	Hayek, Friedrich (1945), “The Use of Knowledge in Society,” American Economic
    Review, 35(4): 519–530.
23. Jensen, Michael and William Meckling (1976), “Theory of the Firm: Managerial
    Behavior, Agency Costs, and Ownership Structure,” Journal of Financial Economics,
    3(4): 305–360.
24. Kitch, Edmund W., ed. (1983), “The Fire of Truth: A Remembrance of Law and
    Economics at Chicago, 1932–1970,” Journal of Law and Economics, 26(1): 163–233.
25. Klein, Benjamin, R. A. Crawford, and A. A. Alchian (1978), “Vertical Integration,
    Appropriable Rents, and the Competitive Contracting Process,” Journal of Law and
    Economics, 21(2): 297–326.
26. Knight, Frank H. (1921), Risk, Uncertainty, and Profit, New York: Houghton Mifflin.
27. Knight, Frank H. (1933), Risk, Uncertainty, and Profit, London: London School of
    Economics and Political Science, (Orig. pub. 1921).
28. Kreps, David M. (1999), “Markets and Hierarchies and (Mathematical) Economic
    Theory,” in Firms, Markets, and Hierarchies, eds. Glenn Carroll and David Teece,
    121–155, New York: Oxford University Press.
29. Kuhn, Thomas S. (1970), The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. 2nd ed., Chicago:
    University of Chicago Press.
30.	Levin, Jonathan, and Steven Tadelis (2010), “Contracting for Government Services:
    Theory and Evidence from US Cities,” Journal of Industrial Economics, forthcoming.
31.	Levy, Brian, and Pablo Spiller (1994), “The Institutional Foundations of Regulatory
    Commitment: A Comparative Analysis of Telecommunications Regulation,” Journal of
    Law, Economics and Organization, 10(2): 201–246.


474


32. Lewis, Tracy (1983), “Preemption, Divestiture, and Forward Contracting in a Market
    Dominated By a Single Firm,” American Economic Review, 73(5): 1092–1101.
33.	Llewellyn, Karl N. (1931), “What Price Contract? An Essay in Perspective,” Yale Law
    Journal, 40: 704–751.
34.	Macaulay, Stewart (1963), “Non-Contractual Relations in Business: A Preliminary
    Study,” American Sociological Review, 28(1): 55–67.
35.	Macher, Jeffrey T., and Barak D. Richman (2008), “Transaction Cost Economics: An
    Assessment of Empirical Research in the Social Sciences,” Business and Politics, 10(1):
    1–63.
36.	Macneil, Ian R. (1974), “The Many Futures of Contracts,” Southern California Law
    Review, 47: 691–816.
37.	March, James G., and Herbert A. Simon (1958), Organizations, New York: John Wiley
    & Sons.
38.	Marris, Robin (1964), The Economic Theory of Managerial Capitalism, New York: Free
    Press.
39.	Marschak, Jacob (1968), “Economics of Inquiring, Communicating, Deciding,”
    American Economic Review, 58(2): 1–18.
40.	McKenzie, L. (1951), “Ideal Output and the Interdependence of Firms,” Economic
    Journal, 61(244): 785–803.
41.	Menard, Claude (1996), “Why Organizations Matter,” Atlantic Economic Journal, 24(4):
    281–300.
42.	Michels, Robert (1962), Political Parties, Glencoe, IL: Free Press.
43. Posner, Richard A. (1977), Economic Analysis of Law. 2nd ed., Boston: Little, Brown.
44.	Reder, Melvin W. (1999), Economics: The Culture of a Controversial Science, Chicago:
    University of Chicago Press.
45.	Riordan, Michael, and Oliver Williamson (1985), “Asset Specificity and Economic
    Organization,” International Journal of Industrial Organization, 3(4): 365–378.
46.	Schelling, Thomas C. (1960), The Strategy of Conflict, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
    University Press.
47.	Schultz, George (1995), “Economics in Action: Ideas, Institutions, Policies,” Papers
    and Proceedings of the American Economic Association, American Economic Review,
    85(2): 1–8.
48.	Simon, Herbert (1957a), Administrative Behavior. 2nd ed., New York: Macmillan.
    – (1957b), Models of Man, New York: John Wiley & Sons.
    – (1984), “On the Behavioral and Rational Foundations of Economic Dynamics,”
    Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 5(1): 35–56.
    – (1985), “Human Nature in Politics: The Dialogue of Psychology with Political
    Science,” American Political Science Review, 79(2): 293–304.
    – (1991), Models of My Life, New York: Basic Books.
49.	Solow, Robert (2001). “A Native Informant Speaks,” Journal of Economic Methodology, 8
    (1): 111–112.
50.	Stigler, George J. (1951), “The Division of Labor Is Limited By the Extent of the
    Market,” Journal of Political Economy, 59(3): 185–193.
    – (1992), “Law or Economics?” Journal of Law and Economics, 35(2): 455–468.
51.	Summers, Clyde (1969), “Collective Agreements and the Law of Contracts,” Yale Law
    Journal, 78(4): 525–575.
52. Tadelis, Steven (2002), “Complexity, Flexibility, and the Make-or-Buy Decision,”
    Papers and Proceedings” of the American Economic Association, American Economic
    Review, 92(2): 433–437.
    – (2010a), “Oliver Williamson: His Main Contribution, its Importance, and what
    Organizations Can Learn From Him,” California Management Review, forthcoming.
    – (2010b), “Transaction Cost Economics,” unpublished manuscript, University of
    California, Berkeley.



                                                                                      475


53.   Whinston, Michael (2001), “Assessing Property Rights and Transaction-Cost Theories
      of the Firm,” American Economic Review, 91(2): 184–188.
54.   Williamson, Oliver E. (1964), The Economics of Discretionary Behavior: Managerial
      Objectives in a Theory of the Firm, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
      – (1971), “The Vertical Integration of Production: Market Failure Considerations,”
      American Economic Review, 61(2): 112–123.
      – (1975), Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust Implications, New York: Free
      Press.
      – (1976), “Franchise Bidding for Natural Monopoly – in General and with Respect to
      CATV,” Bell Journal of Economics, 7(1): 73–104.
      – (1979), “Transaction Cost Economics: The Governance of Contractual Relations,”
      Journal of Law and Economics, 22 (2): 233–61.
      – (1983), “Credible Commitments: Using Hostages to Support Exchange,” American
      Economic Review, 73(4): 519–540.
      – (1985), The Economic Institutions of Capitalism, New York: Free Press.
      – (1991), “Comparative Economic Organization: The Analysis of Discrete Structural
      Alternatives,” Administrative Science Quarterly, 36 (2): 269–296.
      – (1996), The Mechanisms of Governance, New York: Oxford University Press.
      – (2000), “The New Institutional Economics: Taking Stock, Looking Ahead,” Journal
      of Economic Literature, 38(3): 595–613.
      – (2002), “The Theory of the Firm as Governance Structure: From Choice to
      Contract,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 16(3): 171–195.
      – (2003), “Examining Economic Organization through the Lens of Contract,”
      Industrial and Corporate Change, 12 (4): 917–942.
      – (2008), “Corporate Boards of Directors: In Principle and In Practice,” Journal of
      Law, Economics, and Organization, 24(2): 247–272.
      – (2009), “Opening the Black Box of Firm and Market Organization: Antitrust,”
      in The Modern Firm, Corporate Governance and Investment, ed. Per-Olof Bjuggren and
      Dennis C. Mueller, 11–42, Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar.
Portrait photo of Professor Williamson by photographer Ulla Montan.




476
