FROM UTOPIAN THEORY TO PRACTICAL
APPLICATIONS: THE CASE OF ECONOMETRICS

R ACNAR F RISCH
University of Oslo
Lecture to the memory of Alfred Nobel, June 17, 1970




I NTRODUCTION
In this essay on econometrics in its conception and its use in economic planning
for the betterment of man’s fate, I will try to cover a very broad field.
   When talking about the methodology in the particular fields mentioned -
about which I am supposed to have a little more than second hand knowledge
- I have always found it utterly inadequate to focus attention only on these special
fields without seeing them in a much broader perspective.
   Therefore it was inevitable that I should have to include in the field of vision
of this paper also some branches of science where I can only speak as a layman,
hopefully as a somewhat informed layman. For whatever blunders I may have
made in these fields I must ask for the reader’s forgiveness.
   So this paper will include by way of introduction some reflections on human
intelligence and wisdom (two very different things), and on the nature of
natural laws, including some general reflections of a “Kritik der reinen Ver-
nunft”-sort.
   I shall try to present my remarks as far as possible without technicalities and
mathematical details, because I want to reach the general reader. This I will
do even at the risk of presenting some material which may seem trivial to some
of my advanced colleagues.
   The subsequent sections will make it more tangible what I mean by the
above general formulations. At this stage let me only mention a striking
manifestation of the difference between intelligence and wisdom: The case of
Evariste Galois (1811-1832). He was one of the greatest mathematical geniuses
that ever lived. His theory of transformation groups laid for instance completely
bare the nature of roots of algebraic equations. This is a striking example
of supreme intelligence.
    But the case of Galois is also a striking example of lack of wisdom. In a
clash with political opponents, where also a girl was involved, in his own words
“an infamous prostitute” (1) he accepted a duel with pistols. He was not a
good shotsman and knew for certain that he would be killed in the duel.
Therfore, he spent the night before the duel in writing down at a desperate
speed his mathematical testament. Here we find a brilliant expose of his main
mathematical ideas. The next day he was shot, and died the following day at
the age of 21.


10                                  Economic Sciences 1969

1. T HE L URES OF U NSOLVABLE P ROBLEMS
Deep in the human nature there is an almost irresistible tendency to concen-
trate physical and mental energy on attempts at solving problems that seem to
be unsolvable. Indeed, for some kinds of active people only the seemingly un-
solvable problems can arouse their interest. Other problems, those which can
reasonably be expected to yield a solution by applying some time, energy and
money, do not seem to interest them. A whole range of examples illustrating
this deep trait of human nature can be mentioned.
   The mountain climber. The advanced mountain climber is not interested in
fairly accessible peaks or fairly accessible routes to peaks. He becomes enthu-
siastic only in the case of peaks and routes that have up to now not been con-
quered.
   The Alchemists spent all their time and energy on mixing various kinds of
matter in special ways in the hope of producing new kinds of matter. To produce
gold was their main concern. Actually they were on the right track in prin-
ciple, but the technology of their time was not advanced far enough to assure a
success.
   The alluring symmetry problem in particle physics. Around 1900, when the theory
of the atom emerged, the situation was to begin with relatively simple. There
were two elementary particles in the picture: The heavy and positively charged
PROTON and the light and negatively charged ELECTRON. Subsequently
one also had the NEUTRON, the uncharged counterpart of the proton. A
normal hydrogen atom, for instance, had a nucleus consisting of one proton,
around which circulated (at a distance of 0.5. 10 -18 cm) one electron. Here the
total electric charge will be equal to 0. A heavy hydrogen atom (deuterium)
had a nucleus consisting of one proton and one neutron around which circu-
lated one electron. And similarly for the more complicated atoms.
   This simple picture gave rise to an alluring and highly absorbing problem.
The proton was positive and the electron negative. Did there exist a positively
charged counterpart of the electron? And a negatively charged counterpart of the
proton? More generally: Did there exist a general symmetry in the sense that to
any positively charged particle there corresponds a negatively charged counter-
part, and vice versa? Philosophically and mathematically and from the view-
point of beauty this symmetry would be very satisfactory. But it seemed to be an
unsolvable problem to know about this for certain. The unsolvability, however, in
this case was only due to the inadequacy of the experimental technology of the
time. In the end the symmetry was completely established even experimentally.
The first step in this direction was made for the light particles (because here the
radiation energy needed experimentally to produce the counterpart, although
high, was not as high as in the case of the heavy particles). After the theory of
Dirac, the positron, i.e. the positively charged counterpart of the electron, was
produced in 1932. And subsequently in 1955 (in the big Berkeley accelerator)
the antiproton was produced.
   The final experimental victory of the symmetry principle is exemplified in
the following small summary table


                                          R. A. K. Frisch                                      11



                                                 Electric charge
                                                            0             - 1




Note. Incidentally, a layman and statistician may not be quite satisfied with the terminology,
because the “anti” concept is not used consistently in connection with the electric charge.
Since the antiproton has the opposite charge of the proton, there is nothing to object to the
term anti in this connection. The difference between the neutron and the antineutron,
however, has nothing to do with the charge. Here it is only a question of a difference in spin
(and other properties connected with the spin). Would it be more logical to reserve the
terms anti and the corresponding neutr to differences in the electric charge, and use expressions
like, for instance counter and the corresponding equi when the essence of the difference is a
question of spin (and other properties connected with the spin)? One would then, for in-
stance, speak of a counterneutron instead of an antineutron.


   The population explosion in the world of elementary particles. As research pro-
gressed a great variety of new elementary particles came to be known. They
were extremely short-lived (perhaps of the order of a microsecond or shorter),
which explains that they had not been seen before. Today one is facing a
variety of forms and relations in elementary particles which is seemingly as
great as the macroscopic differences one could previously observe in forms and
relations of pieces of matter at the time when one started to systematize things
by considering the proton, the electron and the neutron. Professor Murray
Gell-Mann, Nobel prize winner 1969, has made path-breaking work at this
higher level of systematization. When will this drive for systematization result
in the discovery of something still smaller than the elementary particles?
   Matter and antimatter. Theoretically one may very precisely consider the
existence of the “anti” form of, for instance, a normal hydrogen atom. This
anti form would have a nucleus consisting of one antiproton around which
circulated one positron. And similarly for all the more complicated atoms.
This leads to the theoretical conception of a whole world of antimatter. In theory
all this is possible. But to realize this in practice seems again a new and now
really unsolvable problem. Indeed, wherever and whenever matter and anti-
matter would come in contact, an explosion would occur which would produce
an amount of energy several hundred times that of a hydrogen bomb of the
same weight. How could possibly antimatter be produced experimentally?
And how could antimatter experimentally be kept apart from the normal
matter that surrounds us? And how could one possibly find out if antimatter
exists in some distant galaxes or metagalaxes? And what reflections would the


12                               Economic Sciences 1969


existence of antimatter entail for the conception of the “creation of the world”,
whatever this phrase may mean. These are indeed alluring problems in physics
and cosmology which - at least today - seem to be unsolvable problems, and
which precisely for this reason occupy some of the finest brains of the world today.
   Travelling at a speed superior to that of light. It is customary to think that this is
impossible. But is it really? It all depends on what we mean by “being in a
certain place”. A beam of light takes about two million years to reach from us
to the Andromeda nebula. But my thought covers this distance in a few seconds.
Perhaps some day some intermediate form of body and mind may permit us to
say that we actually can travel faster than light.
   The astronaut William Anders, one of the three men who around Christmas
time 1968 circled the moon in Apollo 8 said in an interview in Oslo (2):
“Nothing is impossible . . . it is no use posting Einstein on the wall and say:
Speed of light-but not any quicker . . . 30 nay 20, years ago we said: Impos-
sible to fly higher than 50 000 feet, or to fly faster than three times the speed of
sound. Today we do both.”
   The dream of Stanley Jevons. The English mathematician and economist
Stanley Jevons (1835-1882) dreamed of the day when we would be able to
quantify at least some of the laws and regularities of economics. Today - since
the break-through of econometrics - this is not a dream anymore but a
reality. About this I have much more to say in the sequel.
   Struggle, sweat and tears. This slight modification of the words of Winston
Churchill is admirably suited to caracterize a certain aspect of the work of
the scientists - and particularly of that kind of scientists who are absorbed in
the study of “unsolvable” problems. They pass through ups and downs. Some-
times hopeful and optimistic. And sometimes in deep pessimism. Here is where
the constant support and consolation of a good wife is of enormous value to the
struggling scientist. I understand fully the moving words of the 1968 Nobel
prize winner Luis W. Alvarez when he spoke about his wife: “She has provided
the warmth and understanding that a scientist needs to tide him over the
periods of frustration and despair that seem to be part of our way of life” (3).




2. A P HILOSOPHY    OF   C HAOS . THE E VOLUTION          TOWARDS   A   M AMMOTH S INGULAR
T RANSFORMATION
In the The Concise Oxford Dictionary (4) - a most excellent book - "philo-
sophy" is defined as “love of wisdom or knowledge, especially that which
deals with ultimate reality, or with the most general causes and principles of
things”.
  If we take a bird’s eye-view of the range of facts and problems that were
touched upon in the previous section, reflections on the “ultimate reality”
quite naturally come to our mind.
  A very general point of view in connection with the “ultimate reality” I
developed in lectures at the Institut Henri Poincaré in Paris in 1933. Subse-
quently the question was discussed in my Norwegian lectures on statistics (5).


                                     R. A. K. Frisch                                  13


   The essence of this point of view on “ultimate reality” can be indicated by
a very simple example in two variables. The generalization to many variables
is obvious. It does not matter whether we consider a given deterministic, em-
pirical distribution or its stochastic equivalence. For simplicity consider an
empirical distribution.
   Let x1 and x2 be the values of two variables that are directly observed in a
series of observations. Consider a transformation of x 1 and x2 into a new set
of two variables y1 and y 2. For simplicity let the transformation be linear i.e.


                                        The b’s and a’s being constants.




(2.2)

is the Jacobian of the transformation, as it appears in this linear case.
    It is quite obvious - and well known by statisticians - that the correlation
coefficient in the set (y1y 2) will be different from-stronger or weaker than-the
correlation coefficient in the set (x1x 2) (“ spurious correlation”). It all depends
on the numerical structure of the transformation.
    This simple fact I shall now utilize for my reflections on an “ultimate reality”
in the sense of a theory of knowledge.
    It is clear that if the Jacobian (2.2) is singular, something important happens.
In this case the distribution of y 1 and y 2 in a (y1y 2) diagram is at most one-
dimensional, and this happens regardless of what the individual observations
x 1 and x 2 are - even if the distribution in the (x 1x 2) diagram is a completely
chaotic distribution. If the distribution of x1 and x2 does not degenerate to a
point but actually shows some spread, and if the transformation determinant is
of rank 1, i.e. the determinant value being equal to zero but not all its elements
being equal to zero, then all the observations of y 1 and y2 will lie on a straight line
in the (yl y 2) diagram. This line will be parallel to the y1 axis if the first row of
the determinant consists exclusively of zeroes, and parallel to the y 2 axis if the
second row of the determinant consists exclusively of zeroes. If the distribution
of x1 and x2 degenerates to a point, or the transformation determinant is of rank
zero (or both) the distribution of y1 and y2 degenerates to a point.
    Disregarding these various less interesting limiting cases, the essence of the
situation is that even if the observations x 1 and x2 are spread all over the (x1x 2)
diagram in any way whatsoever, for instance in a purely chaotic way, the
corresponding values of y1 and y2 will lie on a straight line in the (y 1y 2) diagram
when the transformation matrix is of rank 1. If the slope of this straight line
is finite and different from zero, it is very tempting to interpret y 1 as the “cause”
of y2 or vice versa. This “cause”, however, is not a manifestation of something
intrinsic in the distribution of x1 and x2, but is only a human figment, a human
device, due to the special form of the transformation used.
    What will happen if the transformation is not exactly singular but only


14                                Economic Sciences 1969


near to being singular? From the practical viewpoint this is the crucial question.
Here we have the following proposition:
(2.3)         Suppose that the absolute value of the correlation coefficient r x i n
              (x 1x 2) is not exactly 1. Precisely stated, suppose that
( 2 . 3 . 1 ) 0 < (rXI < 1 - E w h e r e 0 < E < 1 .
    This means that ε may be chosen as small as we desire even exactly 0, but
it must not be exactly 1. Hence |rX| may be as small as we please even exactly 0,
but not exactly 1.
    Then it is possible to indicate a nonsingular transformation from x 1 and x2
to the new variables y1 and y2 with the following property: However small we
choose the positive, but not 0, number δ , the correlation coefficient rY i n
 (y l y 2) will satisfy the relation
 (2.3.2)       |rY |( >, l-8 0 < 6 < 1
whatever the actual distribution of (x 1x 2) may be, provided only that it
satisfies (2.3.1). The nature of the transformation to be chosen will, of course,
depend on the previous choice of ε and δ. But to any such choice it is possible
to indicate a nonsingular transformation with the specified properties.
    Briefly expressed in words this means the following:
(2.3.3) Suppose that the distribution of (x1x2) is unknown and arbitrary with
              the only proviso that it shall not degenerate into a straight line (as
              expressed by (2.3.1) where we may choose ε as small as we please,
              even exactly 0). We can then indicate a nonsingular linear trans-
              formation of the variables x1 and x 2 which will produce as strong a
              correlation in (y 1 y 2) as we please. (This is expressed in (2.3.2) where we
              may choose δ as small as we please, however different from 0.)
     I have said that it is possible to indicate a nonsingular transformation with
the specified properties. This is true, but the smaller we have chosen ε and δ the
nearer to singularity we must go in order to make the linear transformation such
 as to have the specified properties.
Now let us reverse the viewpoint and assume that y1 and y2 are directly observed,
perhaps with a strong correlation. It seems that we have no way of excluding
the possibility that the observed variables y1 and y2 are in fact derived from an
essentially chaotic distribution of two variables x 1 and x 2. More generally:
 Perhaps there are many x’s and y’s, and more x’s than y’s, and consequently a
matrix of transformation from the x’s to the y’s, whose rank is at most equal to
the number of the y’s. How could we then exclude the possiblity that the chaotic
world of the x’s is “the ultimate reality”?
     What would the transformation mean in this case? For one thing it would
express the present status of our sense organs as they have emerged after a long
development over time.
     It is quite clear that the chances of survival of man will be all the greater
the more man finds regularities in what seems to him to be the “outer world”.
The survival of the fittest will simply eliminate that kind of man that does
not live in a world of regularities. This development over time would work
partly unconsciously through the biological evolution of the sense organs, but it
would also work consciously through the development of our experimental


                                    R. A. K. Frisch                                15

techniques. The latter is only an extension of the former. In principle there is
no difference between the two. Indeed, science too has a constant craving for
regularities. Science considers it a triumph whenever it has been able by some
partial transformation here or there, to discover new and stronger regularities.
If such partial transformations are piled one upon the other, science will help
the biological evolution towards the survival of that kind of man that in the
course of the millenniums is more successful in producing regularities. If “the
ultimate reality” is chaotic, the sum total of the evolution over time - biological
and scientific - would tend in the direction of producing a mammoth
singular transformation which would in the end place man in a world of
regularities. How can we possibly on a scientific basis exclude the possibility
that this is really what has happened ? This is a crucial question that con-
fronts us when we speak about an “ultimate reality”. Have we created the laws of
nature, instead of discovering them? Cf. Lamarck vs. Darwin.
   What will be the impact of such a point of view? It will, I believe, help us to
think in a less conventional way. It will help us to think in a more advanced, more
relativistic and less preconceived form. In the long run this may indirectly be
helpful in all sciences, also in economics and econometrics.
   But as far as the concrete day to day work in the foreseeable future is con-
cerned, the idea of a chaotic “ultimate reality” may not exert any appreciable
influence. Indeed, even if we recognize the possibility that it is evolution of man
that in the long run has created the regularities, a pragmatic view for the fore-
seeable future would tell us that a continued search for regularities - more or
less according to the time honoured methods - would still be “useful” to man.
   Understanding is not enough, you must have compassion. This search for regularities
may well be thought of as the essence of what we traditionally mean by the
word “understanding”. This “understanding” is one aspect of man’s activity.
Another - and equally important - is a vision of the purpose of the understand-
ing. Is the purpose just to produce an intellectually entertaining game for those
relatively few who have been fortunate enough through intrinsic abilities and
an opportunity of top education to be able to follow this game? I, for one, would
be definitely opposed to such a view. I cannot be happy if I can’t believe that in
the end the results of our endevaours may be utilized in some way for the
betterment of the little man’s fate.
   I subscribe fully to the words of Abba Pant, former ambassador of India to
Norway, subsequently ambassador of India to the United Arab Republic,
and later High Commissioner of India to Great Britain:
“Understanding is not enough, you must have compassion.” (6).

3. A B RIEF S URVEY OF THE D EVELOPMENT OF E CONOMICS IN THE L AST C ENTURY
Turning now to the more specifically economic matters, it is inevitable that
I should begin by making a brief survey of the development of economics in
the last century.
   In the middle of the 19th century John Stuart Mill (1806-1873) in his
famous work “Principles of Economics” said that so far as general principles
are concerned the theory of value and price was now completely elaborated.


16                             Economic Sciences 1969


There was nothing more to add, he said, neither for himself nor any other
author. To us with our relativistic view on knowledge and the development of
science, it is difficult to understand that such a statement could be made. But
to the generation that lived at that time these words by Mill appeared to be
very close to the truth. In Mill’s “Principles” the ideas of Adam Smith (1723-
1790), David Ricardo (1772-l823) and Thomas Robert Malthus (1766-
1834) had been knit together into an organic, logically and seemingly complete
whole.
   Subsequent developments have thoroughly denounced Stuart Mill’s words.
Two break-throughs have emerged in economic theory since the time of
Stuart Mill.
   The classical theory of value - as we find it streamlined in Stuart Mill - was
essentially a theory of production costs based on the thinking of the private
entrepreneur. The entrepreneur will think about as follows: “If I could only
cut my selling price I would be able to draw the customers to me. This, how-
ever, is also the way my competitors think. So, there emerges a sort of gravita-
tional force that pulls prices down. The cost of production is so to speak the
solid base on to which the prices fall down and remain. Hence the cost of
production is “the cause” of prices. This general viewpoint the classical
economists applied with great sagacity to a whole range of commodities , to the
relation between wages and profits and to the theory ofinternational prices etc.
   This theory contains, of course, an irrefutable element of truth. But it is
too simple to give even a crude presentation of the forces at play. The economic
process is an equilibrium affair where both technological and subjective forces.
are at play. The subjective element was nearly left out by the classicists.
   On this point economic theory was completely renewed in the years between
1870 and 1890 when a number of Austrian economists headed by Karl Menger
(1840-1921) undertook a systematic study of the human wants and their place
in a theory of prices. Similar thoughts were expressed also by the Swiss Léon
Walras (1834-1910) and the Englishman Stanley Jevons (1835-l882). This
was the first break-through since Stuart Mill.
   The Englishman Alfred Marshall (1842-1924) subsequently did much to
combine the subjective viewpoint and the cost of production viewpoint. This led
to what we now usually speak of as the neo-classical theory.
   Neither the classicists nor the neo-classicists did much to verify their theo-
retical results by statistical observations. The reason was partly that the statistics
were poor, and partly that neither the classical nor the neo-classical theory
was built out with the systematic statistical verification in view. The architec-
tural plan of the theory had so to speak not made room for this verification.
This fact was criticized by the German historical school under the leadership of
Gustav Schmoller (1838-1917) and by the American institutionalists. These
schools, however, had an unfortunate and rather naive belief in something like
a “theory-free” observation. “Let the facts speak for themselves”. The impact
of these schools on the development of economic thought was therefore not
very great, at least not directly. Facts that speak for themselves, talk in a very
naive language.


                                       A. A. K. Frisch                                   17

   In the first part of the 20th century the picture changed. Partly under the
influence of the criticism of the historical school and the institutionalists the
theoreticians themselves took up a systematic work of building up the theory in
such a way that the theory could be brought in immediate contact with the
observational material. One might say that from now on economics moved
into that stage where the natural sciences had been for a long time, namely the
stage where theory derives its concepts from the observational technique, and in turn theory
influences the observational technique.
  For the first time in history it now seemed that the work on the theoretical front
in economics - now to a large extent mathematically formulated - and             the
work on the outer descriptive front should converge and support each other,
giving us a theory that was elaborate enough to retain the concrete observatio-
nal material, and at the same time a mass ofobservations that were planned and
executed with a view to be filled into the theoretical structure.
  Of course, there had been forerunners for such a combination of economic
theory, mathematics and statistics even earlier. It was represented by such men
as Johan Heinrich von Thünen (1783-l850), Augustin Cournot (1801-1877),
A. J. Dupuit (1804-1866) and Hermann Heinrich Gossen (1810-1858).
But from the first part of the 20ieth century the movement came in for full.
This was the beginning of the econometric way of thinking. And this is what I
would call the second break-through since Stuart Mill.
   A crucial point in this connection is the quantification of the economic
concepts, i.e. the attempts at making these concepts measurable. There is no
need to insist on what quantitative formulation of concepts and relations has
meant in the natural sciences. And I would like to state that for more than a
generation it has been my deepest conviction that the attempted quantification
is equally important in economics.
  The quantification is important already at the level of partial analysis. Here
one has studied the demand for such important commodities as sugar, wheat,
coffe, pig iron, American cotton, Egyptian cotton etc.
   And the quantification is even more important at the global level. Indeed,
at the global level the goal of economic theory is to lay bare the way in which
the different economic factors act and interact on each other in a highly complex
system, and to do this in such a way that the results may be used in practice to
carry out in the most effective way specific desiderata in the steering of the
economy.
   As long as economic theory still works on a purely qualitative basis without
attempting to measure the numerical importance of the various factors,
practically any “conclusion” can be drawn and defended. For instance in a
depression some may say: A wage reduction is needed because that will
increase the profits of the enterprises and thus stimulate the activity. Others
will say: A wage increase is needed because that will stimulate the demand of
the consumers and thus stimulate activity. Some may say: A reduction of the
interest rate is needed because this will stimulate the creation of new enter-
prises. Others may say: An increase of the interest rate is needed because that


18                               Economic Sciences 1969


will increase the deposits in the banks and thus give the banks increased
capacity of lending money.
   Taken separately each of these advocated measures contains some particle of
truth, taken in a very partial sense when we only consider some of the obvious
direct effects, without bothering about indirect effects and without comparing
the relative strengths of the various effects and countereffects. Just as one
would say: If I sit down in a rowing boat and start rowing in the ordinary way,
the boat will be driven backwards because of the pressure exerted by my feet in
the bottom of the boat.
   In a global analysis that shall be useful for practical applications in economic
policy in the nation as a whole, the gist of the matter is to study the relative
strengths of all relevant effects and countereffects, hence the need for quanti-
fication of the concepts.
   This perhaps is the most general and most salient formulation of the need
for econometrics. How far we would be able to go in this direction was of course
another question. But at least the attempt had to be made if economics were to
approach the state of an applied science.
   It goes without saying that econometrics as thus conceived does not exhaust
all the contents of economics. We still need - and shall always need - also broad
philosophical discussions, intuitive suggestions of fruitful directions of research,
and so on. But this is another story with which I will not be concerned here (7).
Let me only say that what econometrics - aided by electronic computers - can
do, is only to push forward by leaps and bounds the line of demarcation
from where we have to rely on our intuition and sense of smell.


4. S OME H ISTORICAL    N OTES   ON THE    F OUNDING      OF   T HE E CONOMETRIC   S OCIETY
In the files of the Oslo University Institute of Economics I have located a folder
containing letters and copies of letters dating from the years when the plans for
an econometric society took shape. Here are interesting ideas and opinions from
outstanding people in different parts of the world. Most of these people have
now passed away.
   One of them was my good friend professor Francois Divisia. His letter of 1
September 1926 from his home in Issy les Moulineaux (Seine) was handwritten
in his fine characters, 8 pages to the brim with every corner of the paper used.
Most of the letter contained discussions on specific scientific questions, but
there were also some remarks of an organizational sort. He spoke for instance
of his correspondence with professor Irving Fisher of Yale. About this he
said: ”Je suppose qu'il s’agit d’une liste destinée à établir une liason entre les écono-
mistes mathématiciens du monde entier”. Whether this was an independent initiative
on the part of Fisher in connection with a plan for a society, or it was an outcome
of my previous correspondence with Fisher, I have not been able to ascertain,
because the files are missing. Divisia continues: “Dans la politique, je ne suis pas
très partisan des organismes internationaux . . . mais dans les domaines desinteresses
comme celui de la science, j’en suis au contraire partisan sans restriction”.
   Answering Divisia in a letter of 4 September 1926 I said inter alia: “Je


                                         R. A. K. Frisch                                      19

  saisis avec enthousiasme l’idee d’une liste ou d’un autre moyen de communication entre les
  économistes mathematiciens du monde entier. J’ai eu moi-même l’idée de tâcher de réaliser
  une association avec un périodique consacré à ces questions. Il est vrai que les périodiques
  ordinaires tels que la Revue d’économie politique ou l’Economic Journal, etc. acceptent
  occasionnellement des memoires mathematiques, mais toujours est-il que l’auteur d’un tel
  memoire se trouve duns l’obligation de restreindre autant que possible l’emploi de symboles
  mathematiques et le raisonnement par demonstration mathematique.
     Je connais déjà plusieurs economistes-mathématiciens dans differents pays, et j'ai
 pensé érire un jour ou l’autre une lettre à chacun d’eux pour avoir leur opinion sur la
 possiblité d’un périodique, (que dites-vous d’une “Econometrica”?, la soeur du”Biometrika”.)
  Maintenant je serai heureux d’avoir votre opinion d’abord. Si vous pensez que cela vaut la
 peine on pourra peut-être commencer par former un cercle restreint qui s’adressera plus
  tard au public. Dans les années à venir j’aurai probablement l’occasion de voyager souvent
 en Amérique et en Europe, alors j'aurai l’occasion de faire la connaissance des économistes
  qui pourront s’intéresser à ce projet, et j’aurai l’occasion de faire un peu de propagande.
 Peut-être pourra-t-on obtenir l’appui d’une des grandes fondations américaines pour la
 publication du périodique.
      Voici une liste de quelque personnes que je connais par correspondance comme étant
  très intéressées au sujet de l’économie pure: Jaime Algarra, Professeur d’éc. pol. Université
 Barcelone, L. von Bortkievicz, Professeur de Stat. Univ. Berlin, E. Bouvier, Prof. de SC.
fin. Univ. Lyon, K. Goldziher, Prof. Techn. Hochschule, Budapest, K. G. Hagström,
 Actuaire, Stockholm, Charles Jordan, Docteur és SC., Budapest, Edv. Mackeprang, Dr.
polit., Copenhague, W. M. Persons, Prof. de Stat. Harvard Univ. Cambridge. Mass.
  U.S.A., E. Slutsky, Moscou, A. A. Young, Prof. d’éc. polit., Harvard Univ. Cam-
 bridge. Mass. U.S.A., P. Rédiadis. Contreamiral, Athènes.”
     I mentioned also a number of others, among whom were: Anderson, Prof.
 Ecole Supérieure de Commerce, Varna, Bulgarie, Graziani, Prof. d’éc. pol. Univ. Napoli,
 Italie, Huber, Dir. de la Stat.gén. de la France, Paris, Ricci, Prof. Univ. Roma,
 Gustavo del Vecchio R. Univ. Commerciale, Trieste.
     In a letter of 22 September 1926 Divisia answered inter alia: “Je suis, vous le
 savez, tout à fait d’accord avec vous sur l’utilité d’une Association Internationale d’Éco-
 nomie pure et j'aime beaucoup le titre d’"Econometrica" auquel vous avez songé pour un
périodique. Toutefois, avant de passer aux realisations, je pense qu’il est indispensable de
 réunir tout d’abord un certain nombre d’adhésions. . . . je me demande s’il ne serait pas
 aussi possible et opportun de s’aboucher à une organisation existente comme l’lnstitut
 international de statistique. . . . Enfin, d’ores et déjà, tout mon concours vous est acquis.”
     In a letter of 1 November 1926 I wrote to Divisia: “Mon départ pour l’Amérique
 a été ajourné de quelques mois. J’en ai profité pour écrire aux personnes suivantes:
 Bortkievicz, Université de Berlin, A. L. Bowley, London School of Economics, Charles
Jordan, Université de Budapest, Eugen Slutsky, Moscou, pour avoir leur opinion sur
 l’utilité et la possibilité de réaliser d’abord un cercle restreint et plus turd peut-être une
 association formelle . . .
    J’ai trouvé que je n’ai pas pû expliquer la chose d’une meilleure fagon qu’en copiant
certains passages de votre dernière lettre . . . C’est peut-être là une petite indiscretion dont je
me suis rendu coupable.”
     The same day 1 November 1926 I wrote to the four persons in question. In


 20                                  Economic Sciences 1969


 my letter to Bortkievicz I said inter alia : "Das veranlässt mich Ihnen einen Gedanken
 vorzubringen, den ich mit Herrn Francois Divisia, Paris, diskutiert habe.
    Es handelt sich urn die Realisierung eines internationalen Zirkels urn den Ideen-Austausch
 zwischen Mathematiker-Ökonomen zu fördern, und zu einer “mise au point” der Probleme
 der mathematischen Ökonomie beizutragen.
    Ich Weiss dass in Deutschland das Interesse fur die mathematische Methode - sei es in
 Nationalökonomie, sei es in Statistik - im allegemeinen nicht sehr verbreitet ist. In den
 letzten Jahren glaube ich aber eine Andeutung zu einem aufwachenden Interesse spüren zu
 können. In 1924 erschien ja in der Sammlung sozialwissenschaftlicher Meister eine Über-
 setzung der “Untersuchungen . . .” von Cournot, und in den Jahrbüchern erschien voriges
 Jahr, wenn ich mich nicht irre, ein Aufsatz über die mathematische Methode, und neu-
 erdings sehe ich dass im Allg. Stat. Arch. eine ziemlich eingehende Besprechung meiner
 Arbeit “Sur un, problème d’économie pure”, erschienen ist.
     Unter diesen Umstanden sollte es vielleicht nicht hoffnungslos sein wenigstens einzelne
 Perstinlichkeiten - Ob nur noch zwei oder drei - zu finden, die sich fur einen internationalen
 Zirkel von Mathematiker-Ökonomen interessieren würden.”
    In my letter to Charles Jordan I said (after having discussed the speed of
 convergence of certain of his iterative methods): “J’aborde maintenant une autre
 question qui serait, je le pense, susceptible de vous intéresser. Il s’agit de la réalisation d’un
 cercle international pour faciliter les échanges de vues entre les économistes-mathematiciens, et
 à contribuer à une mise au point des problèmes de l’économie mathématique.
    Par la copie ci-jointe vous verrez l’opinion de M. Francois Divisia.”
     In my letter to Eugen Slutsky I said inter alia: “Ich danke Ihnen recht herzlich
für die Zusendung Ihrer beiden interessanten Arbeiten “Sulla teoria . . . ” und ” Uber die
 zufällige Anordnung . . .“,
    Die sehr wertvollen Auseinandersetzungen in Ihrem Briefe haben mich sehr interessiert.
 Besondersfreut es mich Ihre Anschauungen über die reine Ökonomie kennen zu lernen. Wie
 Sie bin ich auch davon überzeugt dass der reinen Ökonomie eine grosse Zukunft bevorsteht.
    Doch es lässt sich nicht leugnen, dass bis jetzt den verschiedenen Bestrebungen einzelner
 Persönlichkeiten in den verschiedenen Ländern all zu sehr die Koordination fehlt.”
     The answers from these four people are interesting.
     In a letter of 8 November 1926 professor Bowley writes: “Much as I am
 interested in your proposal, I should prefer not to take any definite part in its
 development till a year has elapsed. By that time you will know how far it is
 capable of realization and I shall hope to adhere to the group that may be
 formed.”
     Professor Bortkieviez answered 11 November 1926 in an eight pages hand-
 written letter, very legibly, and of course with the precision of thought of a
 mathematician. He said : ” Von Ihrem Brief von 1. d. M. und von dem beigefügten
Auszug aus einem an Sie gerichteten Schreiben von Professor Divisia habe ich mit lebhaftem
Interesse Kenntnis genommen. Eine Fbrderung der mathematischen Methode in der National-
ökonomie erscheint mir an sich als durchaus erwünscht, und nit Rücksicht auf die Schwierig-
keiten, die sich auf dem Europäischen Kontinent, von Italien abgesehen, der Unterbring-
ung mathematisch gehaltener Artikel in nationalökonomischen Fachzeitschriften entgegen-
stellen, würde ich die Gründung eines internationalen Organs für mathematische National-
ökonomie begrüssen. . . . Hingegen verspreche ich mir von einem brieflichen Gedanken -


                                       R. A. K. Frisch                                    21

Austausch zwischen Anhtingern der mathematischen Methode nicht viel. Das wäre etwas
unmodern. . . . Die Anregung von Prof. Divisia, eine Organisation für mathematische
Nationalökonomie dem Internationalen Statistischen Institut anzugliedern, zeugt davon,
dass er über den Charakter dieses Instituts unvollkommen unterrichtet ist.”
    The following part of Bortkievicz’s letter is a long and careful comparative
analysis of certain mathematical formulae as they appear in his and my works.
    In a letter of 12 November 1926 Charles Jordan writes (after a discussion of
Hermite polynomials and similar matters) : “Je suis de votre avis que la réalisation
d’un cercle international des économistes mathematiciens serait extrêmement utile à l’avance-
ment de cette science, que les économistes littéraires refusent de reconnaître. La publication
d’un periodique économitrique serait fort desirable. Il n’y a aucun obstacle à la réalisation
du cercle; les difjcultés financières de la publication d’un périodique de dimension modeste
serait, je l’espère, facilement surmontables. . . . Je suis prêt à faire mon possible pour
avancer cette question. Pendant plusieurs années j’ai tenu des tours d’économie mathematique
à Budapest (Université) et cette science m’a toujours vivement intéréssé.
    En me méttant entièrement à votre disposition vous prie . . .”
    In a letter of 16 December 1926 Divisia speaks about the name. He said inter
alia : “Etymologiquement, il faut écrire oe, mais alors pourquoi ne pas aussi l’écrire en
caractères grecs? Pour respecter l’etymologie, ne faudrait-il pas aussi écrire oeconomometrika
ou tout au mois oeconommetrika pour en mutiler aucun des 3 mots osrlo<, νoµoς et pstpov?
Je vous avouerai que votre Econométrica m’avait paru élégant et clair.”
    In the Spring of 1927 I went to the United States and discussed the matter
with colleagues there. I have located a five page memorandum dated October
 1927. It presents more details about the matter. I believe this memorandum
was written jointly by Dr. Charles F. Roos and me.
    The most important item from the time that follows is an abstract of a conver-
sation between professor Schumpeter, dr. Haberler and me in the Colonial
 Club at Harvard University on 29 February 1928. The beginning of the ab-
stract reads as follows:
“I. The terms econometric and econometrics are interpreted as including both
pure economics and the statistical verification of the laws of pure economics, in
 essential distinction to the purely empirical manipulation of statistical data on
economic phenomena.
 II. The possibility of establishing a systematic annotated bibliography of
econometric literature was discussed.”
    It is mentioned that we discussed at great length a list of people who might
be interested in supporting the work. The list contained the following number
of names : Austria 7, Belgium 1, France 10, Germany 9, Great Britain 7, Greece
 1, The Netherlands 3, Hungary 1, Italy 10, Poland 1, Portugal 1, Russia 3,
 Scandinavian Countries 6, Switzerland 2, Spain 1, United States 14. Enclosed
with the abstract of the conversation at the Colonial Club I find an 11 page
 handwritten memorandum by me in French dated April 1928. It contains in all
 essentials the same points as the memorandum of October 1927. There also
 exists a typewritten copy of this French memorandum.
    For family reasons (my father died in 1928 and I had to go back to Oslo to
 assume some heavy responsibilities) my activity in the econometric field was


22                                  Economic Sciences 1969


delayed, as transpires from a letter from Schumpeter written from Chamonix 31
December 1928, where he said: “I have been without your news about our plan of
econometrics for quite a time. As I shall have to tell the publishers of the Archiv
and others one way or the other, I should be much obliged for a few lines from
you about the state of things. Of course, I should not think of going on without you.”
   I have not been able to locate any other notes from this period, so my work
regarding an association and Econometrica seems to have fallen in two distinct
periods.
   The next piece of information I find is in a book by the French economist,
mathematician and philosopher Jacques Rueff. He says (8) : “C’est en 1929 que
Ragnar Frisch, économiste mathématicien norvégien, me demanda de l’aider à promouvoir
la creation d’une association qui rénirait les tenants d’une économie dont les principes
seraient constamment confrontés avec les faits, quantitativement exprimes et soumis à leur
sanction. Le projet fut discuté à un déjeuner où j’avais convié, avec mon interlocuteur
norvégien, Frangois Divisia, qui venait de publier une “Économique Rationelle”. Frangois
Divisia représentait avec Rent Roy et moi la descendance intellectuelle de Clement Colson,
dont nous avions tous trois été les élèves à l’École Polytechnique.
   Nous donnâmes un accueil enthousiaste au projet de Ragnar Frisch. Il fut convenu que
celui-ci partirait pour les États-Unis rallier les concours nécessaires à la constitution d’une
‘Société Internationale d’Économétrie’.”
   About the happenings on my trip to the United States this time I have not
been able to locate any notes. But I retain a vivid impression of a very intimate
contact and cooperation between professor Irving Fisher, Dr. Charles F.
Roos and myself during this period. When Roos and I explained our plan to
professor Fisher it was like throwing a burning match into a barrel of powder.
Fisher threw himself in the adventure for full. We circulated letters to a great
number of persons around the world and had an overwhelming number of
positive reactions.
   As appears from Econometrica (9) the Econometric Society was formed in
Cleveland, Ohio on 29 December 1930. Irving Fisher was elected the first
president. 16 people (3 of them Norwegians) were present at the organizational
meeting. The first volume of Econometrica appeared in 1933.
   The first European meeting of the Econometric Society was held in Lausanne
(the place where Walras lived and worked) on 22-24 September 1931. A
rather complete record is given in Econometrica (10). Professor Jan Tinbergen
was present and spoke at the Lausanne meeting. His important paper “The
Notions of Horizon and Expectation in Dynamic Economics” is published in
the same volume of Econometrica as the report of the Lausanne meeting. His
driving force and great impact on the development of Econometrics from its
beginning and up to this day are so well known that I need not dwell upon
them here. Alfred Cowles 3rd gave an invaluable financial support to Eco-
nometrica.

5. TYPES      OF   E CONOMETRIC    M ODELS   AS   S EEN   FROM AN   A DVANCED V IEWPOINT
TODAY
It is out of the question in this short exposé to give a systematic presentation,


                                    R. A. K. Frisch                              23


of the problems and methods of econometrics in its modern form. One gets an
idea of the broadness of the field by throwing a glance at the program of the
Second World Congress of The Econometric Society to be held in Cambridge,
England 7-14 September 1970. Here there are a total of 46 precisely defined
sessions with a total of 64 organizers of these sessions. The attendance is ex-
pected to be between 500 and 1000. (In the first European meeting in 1931
some twenty persons were present.)
   What I can do here is to give a survey of types of econometric models at the
national level and an example of how one selected problem may be handled.

Some general remarks on types of econometric models at the national level.
The list of variables and the equations and/or bounds that are introduced,
constitute the core of the model. It may be linear or non-linear.
   In addition to the core one may or may not introduce a preference function,
that is a function whose maximization defines the goal of the decisions that
might be studied through the model. With a preference function it becomes
possible to say that one alternative constellation of the values of the set of
variables is better than another and it might even be possible to proceed to deter-
mining an optimal solution. Otherwise the model is only a purely descriptive one,
that can be used to produce a sample of alternative constellations, or to answer
questions of the type: “What will happen if. . .“.
   In all cases the model may be either static (i.e. connecting only variables
at the same point of time), or dynamic (i.e. connecting variables at different
points of time). The recurrent model, based on a fixed strategy, is a special case
of a dynamic model. A moving (rolling) decisional model based on the concept
of already-committed-to variables is better adapted for practical applications, I
believe.
   In all cases the model may be either deterministic or stochastic.
   According to the nature of the core and the nature of the preference function
the types of models may be classified in the 2 x 3 divisions of tab. (5.1). Most
models in actual use at the national level are at present of the simplest types
listed in this table. Some additional explanations of the various cases are given
in tab. (5.2)

The preference function
A common misunderstanding regarding the preference function is due to a lack
of distinguishing between targets (i.e. specific values of some selected variables)
which one will try to realize, and the use of a preference function, and also due
to a lack of distinguishing between the free and the reduced form of the pre-
ference function. It is said that the decision maker at the national level (the
responsible political authority) is not able to understand the meaning of the
core. Therefore he cannot formulate targets or define a preference function.
   These objections vanish if the expert approaches the decision maker in the
appropriate way. I have reached this conclusion not only on theoretical grounds
but also because of my practical experiences.
   One way to approach the decision maker is through interview questions. It is


24                             Economic Sciences 1969


well known that people will not always behave in an actual situation exactly in
 the way they said in an interview question that they would behave in such and
 such a situation. But still, I think, it remains that valuable information may be
 obtained through interview questions, provided the questions are wisely
 formulated in a conversational manner, and not simply carried out by some
 youngster in the opinion poll trade. I have worked out a rather elaborate
 technique for such conversational interviews to be carried out by the econo-
 metric experts. And I have had the good fortune to test this out in conversations
with high-ranking politicians both in developing countries and in industrially
 developed countries. I have found that it is surprising how far one can reach
 in this field when the conversation is wisely steered.
    Essential points in this connection are: (I) To use the free form - the Santa
 Claus form - of the preference function. (II) To assure that the interviewed
person rids his mind completely of any preconceived (and in many cases
 erroneous) ideas he might have on the nature of the core, and hence rid his
 mind of whether it is actually possible to realize the alternatives involved in the
interview questions. (III) To assure that the interviewed person has rid his
mind completely of any possibility of trading in the market any of the alternative
situations which are hypothetically offered to him in the interview questions.
    The interview approach to the preference function is only a first stage in an
iterative process which in each step proceeds by an optimal solution of the mod-
el. For further details regarding these questions see the section on the transi-
tion towards economic planning.
    Another misunderstanding which we sometimes hear, is this: It is said that
there are many different systems of preferences. It is impossible to choose between
these systems. Therefore the concept of preference function cannot be used in
connection with national models. This is one of the biggest pitfalls in the
discussion of this matter. Differences of opinion, of course, there are. One
social group may have one type of preference and another social group may
have other preferences, and different persons may have different preferences
and even the same person may have different preferences at different points of
time. All this is, of course, true. But the problem of settling differences of opi-
nion is not a special problem of econometrics. It is a general problem of human
behaviour and opinions. And there exists a machinery for settling such differ-
ences. This machinery is simply the political system of the country. This
political system - whatever it may be - is just invented in order to settle such
differences. What we have to do as econometricians is to apply this very
system for the formalization of the preferences to go with our models. Thus the
preference function as it appears in our models is an expression for the preferences
of the decision making authority, whatever this authority may be. The preference
function in the model must not be confounded with a general “Welfare func-
tion” in the sense of welfare theory.
   It is not the task for us as econometricians and social engineers to go into a
detailed discussion of the political system. Somewhere in the hierarchy of
sciences a line of demarcation has to be drawn. And here is where we find the
line of demarcation for the econometric planner. As citizens we are, of course,


                                   R. A. K. Frisch                             25


allowed to work for any political system which we think is just and effective. I,
for one, would like to work for a system that really deserves the name demo-
cracy, but this is another story. Compare the beginning of section 6.
   Still another point must be clarified. Sometimes we hear the suggestion that
instead of going to the trouble of discussing preferences, we ought to leave it
to the experts to put on the table of the politicians a number of alternatives
for the development path of the nation’s economy, and ask the politicians to
choose among these alternatives. This may be a defendable procedure if the


26                                Economic Sciences 1969

     Tab. (5.1). Condensed table of types




                                                             No preference function




        The Institutionally Stable Core (or         The purely descriptive stable model
        shorter: the stable core)                   Leads to the concept of dependent
        Those equations and/or bounds               (endogenous) and free (exogeneous)
        which we have to accept if we confine      variables. The number of the free
        the analyses to the institutional and      variables is equal to the number of
        political setting which it is out of        degrees of freedom of the core. The
        the question to change within the           concept of targets cannot be derived
        time horizon of the analyses. For          from the model. The only legitimate
        details see tab. (5.2).                    use of this kind of model is for
           Can also be termed the obligatory        presenting a sample of alternative
        core or the obligatory conditions, or       constellations of the economy, or
        again the conditions that are in-           for answering questions of this sort:
        variant under a change in the               What will happen if . . .? Even
        facultative conditions.                     such limited uses of the model
                                                    may have considerable practical
                                                    importance.




        The Institutionally Sensitive Core          The purely descriptive sensitive model
        (or shorter: the sensitive core)            Similar to the purely descriptive
        Equations and/or bounds some of             stable model with the difference
        which are sensitive to such institu-        that target setting now becomes
        tional and political changes that           still more arbitrary. The conclu-
        might be considered within the              sions drawn from this type of model
        time horizon of the analyses. When          will as a rule be statistically more
        comparing the effects of such               uncertain than in the stable case
        institutional or political changes, it      because now many of the data arc
        is necessary to have a stable core as       difficult to fix numerically.
        a fixed point of reference.


                                 R. A. K. Frisch                                                 27

of econometric models at the national level

                                             A reduced form of the preferencefunction
                                             Only understandable in terms of the
The free form of the preference function    core: The preference function ex-
The gross form. The Santa Claus              pressed in terms of a set of variables
form: Which one of some specified            equal in number to the number of
few alternatives would you choose,           degrees of freedom of the core.
if you had the choice? Not necessary         Mathematically speaking several
to understand the core in order to           reduced forms might (and in
answer such questions.                       general will) exist. The choice of one
                                             particular reduced form is a prac-
                                             tical question.


The free form of the preference function     A reducedform of the preference function
as applied to a stable core                  as applied to the stable core
The free form of the preference              This case is both computationally
function is particularly useful when         and for practical uses highly im-
forming interview questions to the           portant. It leads to the concept of
responsible politicians. In principle        the stable core optimal constellation. It
the complete knowledge of the free           will   as   a   rule    not      be   the   final
form is sufficient to formulate an           practical optimum, but will be
optimalization problem. The ex-              used for comparison purposes. An
pert will then often transform the           interesting figure is the amount by
free form to a reduced form be-              which the stable core optimum
cause he finds this convenient.              preference value is superior to the
                                             value of the preference function
                                             which is obtained through any
                                             institutional and political system
                                             different from that which defines
                                              the stable core.


The free form of the preference function     A reduced form of the preference      functio n
as applied to a sensitive core               as applied to a sensitive core
Same as above but now the free                In this case, and in this case only,
form of the preference function may          the concept of targets can be deri-
contain a greater number of vari-            ved f r om t he model p r ov i ded an
ables. Statistical difficulties of the       optimal solution has been attempt-
same sort as mentioned in the case           ed. Mathematical difficulties in
to    the    left,   and mathematical         explicit search for the optimum
difficulties as mentioned in the case         constellation of the institutional
to the right.                                 parameters in a given institutional
                                             set-up may be circumvented by
                                              arranging institutional games. If so,
                                              the games must be defined so as to
                                              assure comparability between game
                                              results and the stable core optimum.
                                              Particularly important in a search
                                             for the optimal institutional set-up.


28                             Economic Sciences 1969

Tab. (5.2). Some details regarding the structure of the institutionally stable model.


                                      R. A. K. Frisch                                   29


number of meaningful alternatives is very small and if we can trust the experts
not to smuggle their own personal preferences into the choice of alternatives. Ref. ( 11 c).
   Even if we could trust the experts, the listing of alternatives would be
impossible in an advanced form of planning. Indeed, in economic political
discussions there is a nearly infinite number of specific questions that may be
asked. Besides the ones mentioned in section 3 consider for instance these:
“Should we build a road between points A and B in the country?“, “Should we
promote investments that will give employment to many people, or should we
on the contrary promote such investment which will save labour?“, “Should we
aim at a high rate of increase of the gross national product, or should we put
more emphasis on a socially justified distribution of it?“, “Should we aim,
above all, at keeping the price level under control?“, “Or should we sacrifice
the stability of the price level and put more emphasis on the increase of the
gross national product (in real terms) ?“, “Should we sacrifice a part of the
increase of the total gross national product in order to be able to increase the
living standards of one specific social group, say fishermen or industrial
workers?“, “Should we put more emphasis on things that have up to now not
been included in the statistical concept of the gross national product? For
instance, should we try to avoid air-pollution and all the kinds of intoxications
that may be caused by refuse and waste (a problem that must be studied in its
totality as a problem of circulation of matter in society, much in the same way as
we study interindustry relations in an input-output table)?“, “Should we
assess economic value to an undisturbed nature?” etc.
   If we should ask the experts to produce a list of feasible alternatives for the
development path of the economy, a list that would be comprehensible enough
to cover even very approximately all these various specific questions, the list
of possible development path would have to contain millions and millions of
alternatives. The number of alternatives would multiply by cross classification.
   Such a list is impossible for the simple reason that the experts would be
physically unable to analyse and present all these alternatives, and even if
all the alternatives could be analysed and put on the table of the politicians,
the politicians would be absolutely drowned in information. They would not
know where to start and where to end in discussing which alternative to choose.
On the electronic computer one speaks of “information death” when one has
made the mistake of letting the computer print out too many of the intermediate
results. The poor politicians would suffer a similar information death if they
found on their table a hypothetical list of the millions and millions of feasible
development paths.
   In rational economic planning there is no other possibility than to start in
patiently on a discussion of the preference function. To begin with the model
would have to be heavily aggregated, but as experience is gained, more details
would be included.
   Finally a warning should be made against one very simple (and therefore
very popular) procedure. A large number of references to such simple proce-
dures could be given. Suffice it here by way of example to refer to (12). The
unsatisfactory procedure consists in the following: One starts by guessing at the


30                            Economic Sciences 1969

probable growth rate of gross national product in future years. And from
this guess one tries to estimate through the use of input-output analyses,
national accounts etc. what the development of the various production sectors,
consumption etc. will be. This is unsatisfactory for at least three reasons: (I)
The growth rate depends essentially on what decisions are made regarding the
steering of the economy. Guessing at the growth rate therefore implies a guess
regarding the economic policy that will be followed in the years to come.
(II) Even if the growth rate is given, it does not follow what the development of
the various sectors or consumption etc. will be. The economy has many more
degrees of freedom than just one. (III) How can one assert that the growth
rate guessed at is the optimal one, i.e. the growth rate that corresponds best to
the policy makers’ preferences ? The growth rate is indeed not a datum but a
consequence of an optimal solution, with all the intricacies connected with the
determination of that optimum.
   So much for some general points of principle. In the next section I shall
discuss some practical questions connected with the transition towards eco-
nomic planning at the national level.


6. THE T RANSITION      TOWARDS   E CONOMIC P LANNING   AT THE   N ATIONAL L EVEL
Any econometrician who wants to see practical application of his science, will
be highly concerned with applications to economic planning at the national
level.

Economic planning the basis for efficiency and a living democracy
I will give my personal views in this matter. I stress the aspect of efficiency as
well as the aspect of a living democracy. The problem I am driving at is more
ambitious than just to increase the long-term average growth rate of gross
national product. My purpose is to make economic planning at a high aspiration
level one of the pillars of a living democracy. I want a society which is a living
democracy, not only a formal one with free elections, socalled freedom of
speech, a socalled free press and so on, but a democracy that is living in the
sense of actually engaging as many as possible of the citizens to take an active
part in the affairs of the small community where they are living, and also to
take an active part in the affairs of the nation as a whole. I will give an example.
 Some years ago I undertook together with Mrs. Frisch, a lecture trip to Ice-
land visiting also some of the small communities in the north. (It is no secret
that I was invited on this trip in order to help Iceland refrain from applying for
membership in the EEC.). In the small communities in the north the population
depends nearly exclusively on grass farming. This was in the middle of the
haying season. In one place there had gathered an audience of 60 people. Think
of what this means in the sparsely populated country and in the middle of the
haying season. Some of them had travelled 60 km. to come to the meeting.
They brought with them long papers to present and discuss after my lecture.
This is living democracy.
   A high aspiration level. Professor Louis W. Alvarez, Nobel prize winner in


                                    R. A. K. Frisch                               31


physics 1968 said: “Physics is the simplest of all the sciences . . . When we
make a simple change in a system such as adding a little heat, we can easily
predict that the whole thing is going to get warmer . . . But in the case of an
infinitely more complicated system, such as the population of a developing
country like India, no one can yet decide how best to change the existing
conditions” (13). I quite agree that such problems as that of India are not yet
solved. But to help solving them is precisely the high ambition of the econo-
metric planner. The difficulty of such problems is our excuse for not having
reached the same level of precision as the physical sciences have. But we are on
our way. And we are hopeful that we will one day come at least very much
closer to the precision of the physicists, than we are today.
   It is comforting to know that already politicians in many countries do find
our work useful. It warmed my heart when the chairman of the Finance
Committee in the Norwegian Storting on 11 November 1969 opened that
year’s discussion on financial matters by a 170 words speech on behalf of a
unanimous committee expressing how much the politicians owe to the efforts
of the econometricians (14).

 The cooperation between the politicians and the experts
Already today there is, of course, a good deal of cooperation between politicians
and experts. But on one point there is need for a new break-through, namely in
making it a practice to cooperate on the formalization of the preference func-
tion. This will be of basic importance for clarifying what the political authorities
really are aiming at.
   For simplicity let me first describe how to attack the problem for a given
political party.
   A preparatory phase of the expert’s work would simply consist in his making
a systematic use of his general knowledge of the political atmosphere in the
country, and in particular the political atmosphere in the party in question.
The expert will have formed an opinion, a tentative opinion, about what the
preferences of this party would look like if they were formalized in a way that
fits in with the expert’s model and is expressed in a language that will be
understandable to his electronic computer.
    In a subsequent phase the expert - on the basis of his tentative formalization
- will work out a system of interview questions through which he will get
closer to the formalization of the preferences in question. Compare the relevant
parts of section 5. As a simple example of an interview question we may take
the following: What would you, politician, choose if you had the choice
between two packages of economic results, for instance, one package with, say
3% unemployment and an annual inflation rate of 5%, and another package
with, say, 10% unemployment and an inflation rate of 1%. By repeating this
question, but with different figures involved, it will be relatively easy to reach a
situation where the interviewed person would say: It is all the same which one
of the two packages I receive. This point of indifference is precisely what the
expert is driving at. Similarly for other kinds of comparisons. There will be a
whole series of such partial “package questions”. From answers to a complete


32                             Economic Sciences 1969


system of such partial questions the expert will be able to build up a preference
function in its free form. If he finds it convenient, the expert may subsequently
transform this preference function to a reduced form. But this is only a second-
ary question.
   In the third phase the expert will go back to his electronic computer in
which he had already entered the data regarding the core of the economy. To
this he will now add the formalization of the preferences in the quantitative
form as he now sees it. From this will come out a solution, in the form of an
optimal development path for the economy. Optimality being defined through
the preferences of this party and in the preference formalization which the
expert has now reached.
   When the expert comes back to the politicians with his solution, the poli-
ticians will perhaps say: “No, this was not really what we wanted. . . We have
to change these particular aspects of your solution.”
   The expert will understand more or less precisely what sort of changes are
needed in the formulation of the preference function in order to produce a solution
that comes closer to what the politicians now say they want. This leads to a
discussion back and forth. In this way one will work step by step towards a
preference formulation such that the politicians can say about the resulting
solution: “All right, this is what we would like to see.” Or perhaps the expert
will have to end by saying politely: “Your Excellencies, I am sorry but you
cannot have at the same time all these things on which you insist.” The
excellencies, being intelligent persons, will understand the philosophy of the
preference questions and the expert’s study of the core, and will therefore
acquiesce with a solution which is not completely what they like, but at least
something better than other alternative shapes of the development path which
have emerged from the previous tentative solutions.
   Even if we did not go any further with the formalization of the system of
preferences than to work out such an analysis separately for each political party, an
enormous gain would be obtained in elucidating the economic political discus-
sions.
   But we should not stop at this point. We should proceed to a discussion of
what sort of political compromise that might be reached in the formulation of a
unified system of preferences. And then having reached this compromise for-
mulation, there would appear a compromise optimal solution. Here too an
iteration between politicians and experts would take place.
   The top political authority - in a democratic country it would be the elected
Parliament - ought to concentrate most of its time and efforts on a discussion of
this compromise on the formulation of the system of preferences, instead of
using practically all of its time on discussing one by one the specific economic
measures that might have been proposed, and for each of these measures
deciding whether to accept it or not. In the way suggested the parliament
would concentrate its time and energies on the most important things, on the
really vital issues. If this were done, many details could safely be left to the
experts. Big issues would of course finally be checked through one by one
 Parliament decisions.


                                     R. A. K. Frisch                               33


  A simplified scheme for expressing political preferences regarding a few
basic questions, is discussed in ref. (15).




7. INVESTMENT STARTING vs. INVESTMENT SINKING
I shall give an example illustrating an advanced approach to a point in the
planning technique. It concerns the measurement of investments in an advanced
planning model. If the planning model has a time horizon of more than, say, a
year or two, and if investment decisions are an important part of the analyses,
the distinction between investment starting and investment sinking (investment
carry-on-activity) is essential.

7.1. A verbal definition. Investment starting in any given year is the total outlay
 (measured in volume figures, i.e. in monetary units of a fixed purchasing power)
which it is estimated that the projects started that year will have entailed
when they are finally completed-perhaps at some future date. Investment
sinking in any given year is the measure of goods and services that were actually
used (that were “sunk”) that particular year in order to carry towards com-
pletion projects which were started that year or some previous year.

7.2. The project description is a collection of all the descriptive details regarding
a project, that can be given by the specialists (technical engineers, etc.) who
have detailed knowledge about this project, but do not have a systematic
knowledge of all the broader social, economic and political considerations at the
national level that one must take account of before one can reach a well
founded decision as to whether this project is to be accepted or not.
  A rational and coherent treatment of investment criteria can, I think, only
be given by considering all the investment projects - defined through the
project descriptions - as intergrated parts of a complete macroeconomic decision
model with all its detailed and (politically) preferential aspects. The project
descriptions are building stones in the complete decision model. But nothing
more.
  We must stress the fundamental distinction between information that is
available before the optimization of the decision model and information that
only emerges after this optimization.
  This distinction is the crux of the matter in planning at the national level
in any country. In this optimization all the geographical, material, cultural
and political peculiarities of the country come into the picture. These are
parts of the core and of the preference function. This broad perspective can, of
course, not be compressed into the format of a project description for a single
project.
   Therefore, the project descriptions belong definitely to the kind of informa-
tion that is available before optimization. Such information is a necessary basis,
but very far from being a sufficient basis for reaching well founded investment
decisions.


34                              Economic Sciences 1969


7.3. The sinking year and the starting year. Consider a single investment project No. g
(7.3.1)     t = the interflow year (the calendar year) is the year (or quarter or
                 month) to which the complete macroeconomic interflow
                 table with all its balancing and accounting realtions applies.
                 In particular, when we are discussing the difference between
                 investment starting and investment sinking, t will be t h e
                 sinking year.
(7.3.2)     σ = the starting year is the year when actual work on the execution
                 of the project may begin. The decision year i.e., the year when
                 it was decided whether to accept or reject the project No. g,
                 is the year when the whole plan was adopted. This may be an
                 earlier year than σ. As a rule the decision year (the planning)
                 year) will be denoted as the year 0. Research work in connec-
                 tion with the plan and in particular research work in connec-
                 tion with the project No. g may have taken place even earlier.
                 There may be alternative 0’s. The σ’s take care of the phasing
                 problem.
(7.3.3) s = t-σ is the sinking delay. Roughly formulated the sinking delay is
                  “the number of years that have elapsed since starting”.
                  More precisely formulated: s = 0 refers to the sinking that
                 will take place in the same year as the starting (if the project is
                  accepted for starting in a given year.) s = 1 refers to the
                 sinking that will take place in the year that follows immediately
                  after the year when the starting took place. And so on for the
                  higher values of s.


7.4. Sinking flows.
   In tab. (7.4.1) (g) denotes the number of different years in which sinking
inputs for the project No. g will occur, roughly expressed: The construction
period for project No. g. Also years where descriptionally J s = 0 (s< (g)) are
counted.
   The symbols given in table (7.4.1) are general symbols for the sinking flows
and their totals with respect to project No. g. These magnitudes may, for
instance, refer to flows that are determined already in the project description,,
and if so they are denoted Jig (k = h, i, B). This happens for all k and s only
in the case where no sinking substitution possibility exists. The flows that emerge
after the decision model optimization, are denoted J;, (k = h, i, B). These
latter flows always exist and are well defined (possibly with some degrees of
freedom if there remain degrees of freedom in the optimum). In a more general
context the symbols J& (k = h, i, B) in table (7.4.1) may be used simply as
indicating variables that enter into the decision model before optimization.
7.5. Sinking Coefficients in the Non-Substitution Case for Sinking Inputs. In the
special case where no possibility of sinking substitution is assumed to exist, all
the flows in table (7.4.1) are fixed and well defined already in the project descrip-
tion.


                                          R. A. K. Frisch                              35



    Table (7.4.1).




     From    Complementary
       (non-competitive)
       Imports




J = Gross investment (as distinct from I = net investment after depreciation).
H = “Hardware”. The H’s are important variables in the model. If the project descriptions
are stationary, the J’s will be independent of σ .




  In this case we may compute the corresponding system of sinking coefficients.
Denoting coefficients by an apostrophe, the sinking coefficients are:




  In this case the sire of the project in its full dress must - before optimization -
be characterized by some other feature, for instance, by a capacity addition that
may be associated with the project (if it is accepted in its full dress) or by some
other conventional measure for the size of the project. Let this conventional


36                                Economic Sciences 1969


measure of the full dress size of the project be Hgcon, the asterisk* indicating
that this is a magnitude that can be read off from the project description, and
con indicating that the magnitude is a conventional measure of the full dress size
of the project.
   Such a conventional measure may, of course, be introduced regardless of
whether substitution possibilities exist or not, but in the substitution possibility
case it is necessary to rely on such a conventional measure.
   Even in the substitution possibility case there may be some, and perhaps
many, but not all, of the interflows in table (7.4.1) that exist as well determined
magnitudes already in the project description. And for these particular flows we
can introduce a project description determined coefficient-concept by expres-
sing each such flow as a fraction of Hicon, namely

                            (For the sinking flows No. k - either h or i or B -
                            that are determined already in the project description)

   The dimension of (the denomination of) each such coefficient (7.6.1) will
depend on the nature of the input flow in question, and on the conventional
measure that is chosen for Hi”“.
   For the cells of table (7.4.1) for which the flow is not determined already in
the project description, we assume that we have instead information about
equivalence coefficients. For instance, if the input elements in the three cells
formed by the intersection of the three rows α, β, γ, and the column s of table
(7.4.1) form a sinking input substitution ring, the three flows J&, JL,, J& are not
determined in the project description, but we have instead information about
three equivalence coefficients Jzfip,” Ji:z”, J:F;” such that the three flows Jt,, Ji,, JsYg
must satisfy the equation




(eq = “equivalence”, s = sinking delay).

   Here HP is the conventional measure of the full dress size of the project
No. g, and Jade’, Ji:G”, J$‘, are equivalence coefficients for each of the
three sinking input elements α, β, γ that together form the substitution ring
r = (cxS~) for sinking inputs into the project g in the sinking delay year s.
   To take a very simplified example : Digging work connected with the project
g in the sinking delay year s might be performed alternatively in any of the
following three ways :

 (7.6.3)   α = manual labour unaided by digging machines (“Chinese com-
                munes”)
           β = use of small and simple digging machines
           γ = use of big and technically advanced digging machines

     The meaning of (7.6.2) is that the amounts to be used of the three kinds


                                     R. A. K. Frisch                                37


(7.6.3), namely           and J&, are not determined by the project description but may
                  Jig, J&,,
be chosen freely, subject to the condition that the left member of (7.6.2)
always be equal to the conventional full dress measure of the projects, namely
H*‘““.
  g    In other words, before optimization of the decision model we leave open
the possibility that the necessary sinking input from the ring r to the project g
in the sinking delay year s may be achieved either through the input element α
or through β, or through y or through any desired combination of these three ele-
ments, which is such as to make the linear form in the left member of (7.6.2)
equal to Hicon. In subsection 7.7 we shall consider a type of restrictions which it
may be realistic to impose in addition to the equivalence equation, but for the
moment we will only discuss the equivalence equation as such.
    In the sinking substitution case the individual sinking flows such as Jf,,
Jb JL    are not determined by the project description. They are only variables
 to be introduced in the complete decision model before optimization. Therefore,
 in the sinking substitution case the complete model will have more degrees of
freedom before optimization than a similar model where no sinking substitution is
 permitted.
   While the existence of input equivalence rings increases the number of degree
of freedom in the decision model, it does not introduce any non-linearity.
Indeed, the equation (7.6.2) is a linear equation. If the effects of the investment
considered are to change the input-output coefficients, or any other coefficients
in the model as it existed before the introduction of the substitution possibilities,
then we will introduce non-linearities. This is the infra case.
7.7. The complementarity restrictions that may be associated with an equivalence ring.
Consider again the example (7.6.3). I n concrete reality even the most auto-
matically advanced digging machine can, of course, not be let loose to perform
the work alone without the aid of any manual labour. This fact may be taken
account of in a number of more or less elaborate ways when we construct the
complete decision model. But the simplest way to do it might be still to use the
concept of equivalence equations as explained in Section 7.6, but now to
complete this point of view by adding a certain type of restrictions which we
may term complementary restrictions.
   The meaning of the complementary restrictions can best be explained by
changing slightly the definition of the input element α in the example (7.6.3),
letting now α simply stand for “manual labour”, i.e. dropping the specification
“unaided by digging machines”. Having changed our example in this way, we
may add a restriction expressing the fact that a part of the variable J”,, has to be
used as a complement to the variable yPg and another part of the variable J& has to
be used as a complement to the variable Jt,. If we want to avoid the complica-
tion which it would be to split the variable JL, into several variables, we can
express the essence of the complementarity situation considered simply by in-
troducing a restriction of the form

 (7.7.1)   J”,, 3 some coefficient times J& plus some coefficient times J&.
   We can formalize this idea by imposing a restriction of the form


38                             Economic Sciences 1969




are three coefficients that are determined in the project description. (ρ = “restric-
tion”, or more explicitly: p = a restriction associated with rgs. The super-
script corn indicates “complementarity”).
   There may be several restrictions (ρ = 1, 2, 3 etc.) of the form (7.7.2) expres-
sing, for instance, the fact that if we choose to use some big digging machines -
input elements y - we may need also some small and simple digging machines
- input elements β - as a complement to γ .
   The fact that the coefficients J* in (7.7.2) are determined by the project
description, does, of course, not mean that the actual flows J& Jbg and JYt,
are also determined by the project description. They are still variables. But if
we choose to put one of these actual flows equal to a given magnitude, any
complementarity restriction of the form (7.7.2) will reduce the admissibility
range for the other actual flows.
   The formal set up (7.7.2) which introduces a set of restrictions Q associated
with rgs is a very general one. It opens the possibility of expressing a great
variety of complementary restrictions which we may find it necessary to introduce
in order to make the complete decision model realistic enough to cover an actual
situation. The equivalence equations express the fact that substitution possi-
bilities exist, while the complementary restrictions express the limitations that
exist on these substitution possibilities.
                                           *
   In order not to abuse the editor’s great generosity in allotting me space,
I shall have to stop my little example here. Further considerations along this
line are given in ref. (16). These concepts are finally worked into the complete
decision model through the concepts of the hypothetical starting variables H. This
involves many problems of a mixed theoretical and statistical sort. A survey of
how the main magnitudes are book-keepingly interconnected is given in ref.
(17).


                                            R. A. K. Frisch                                          39


     R EFERENCES
1. Johan Aarnes and Jon Reed: “Matematikk i vår tid”, Scandinavian University Books,
     1967, pp. 173-196.
2. The newspaper “Aftenposten”, Oslo, 20 August 1969.
3. Les Prix Nobel en 1968, p. 63.
4. The Concise Oxford Dictionary, Oxford, 1959-printing p. 804.
5. Ragnar Frisch: Mathematical Statistics, section 25 f (Mimeographed memorandum
     from The Oslo University Institute of Economics, 21 February 1951).
6. Quotation from a private conversation we had in Oslo some years ago.
7. In an invited address at the First World Congress of The Econometric Society, held in
     Rome 1965, I formulated a strong criticism of what I called “playometrics”. An elabora-
     tion of this criticism is to he published in a volume 1970 in honour of Sir Roy Harrod.
8. Jacques Rueff: “Des sciences physiques aux sciences morales”. Un essai de 1922 recon-
     sidéré en 1969, p. 15.
9. Econometrica. Vol. 1, 1933, pp. 71-72.
10. Econometrica. Vol. 1, 1933, pp. 73-86.
11. Ragnar Frisch: “Rational Price Fixing in a Socialistic Society”. Economics of Planning.
     Vol. 6, 1966, in particular pp. 117-124.
11 b. Ragnar Frisch: “Econometrics in the Midst of Analytical and Social Turmoils.” To
     appear in the Festschrift for Herman Wold. 1970.
11   c. A recent bad case of such smuggling is, for instance, found in the work of the expert com-
     mittee on the location of the main airport to be built in southern Norway.
1 2 . “ L a p r o g r a m m a t i o n e u r o p é e n n e ” . Report presented by the Vice-President of the
      C o m m i s s i o n Robert Marjolin to a colloquium held 30 November - 2 December 1962 in
     Rome.
13. Les Prix Nobel en 1968, p. 65.
14. “Forhandlingar i Stortinget”, 11 November 1969, p. 283.
15. Ragnar Frisch: “Planning for the United Arab Republic”, Economics of Planning, Vol.
    5, 1965.
16. Ragnar Frisch: “Investment Starting vs. Investment Sinking”, Economics of Planning,
     Vol. 7, 1967.
17. Ragnar Frisch: “A generalized form of the refi interflow table”. In “Problems of
    Economic Dynamics and Planning”, Essays in honour of Michael Kalecki, Warszawa,
     1964. [In this paper p. 13 acknowledgements are given to a number of former and
     present research associates in the Oslo University Institute of Economics: Hans Heli,
     Tore Johansen, Hans Jacob Kreyberg, Jan Serck-Hanssen and Tore Thonstad].



                                                    *

     My thanks are due to my wife Mrs. Astrid Frisch and to my daughter Mrs. Ragna Frisch
     Hasnaoui for assistance in the proofreading.
