THE ACCOUNTS OF SOCIETY
Nobel Memorial Lecture, 8 December, 1984




RICHARD STONE
13 Millington Road,
Cambridge, U.K.



CONTENTS
1. The role of accounting systems
2. Precursors
3. Concepts and definitions
4. The national economic accounts
5. Statistical problems
6. Regional accounts
7. Demographic accounts
8. Concluding remarks
9. A list of works cited




THE ACCOUNTS OF SOCIETY

1. The Role of Accounting Systems
This morning I shall discuss how accounting can be useful in describing and
understanding society. The three pillars on which an analysis of society ought
to rest are studies of economic, socio-demographic and environmental phenom-
ena. Naturally enough, accounting ideas are most developed in the economic
context, and it is to this that I shall devote much of my time, but they are
equally applicable in the other two fields. By organising our data in the form of
accounts we can obtain a coherent picture of the stocks and flows, incomings
and outgoings of whatever variables we are interested in, whether these be
goods and services, human beings or natural resources, and thence proceed to
analyse the system of which they form part. The function of the national
accounts in this process can perhaps be better understood if I illustrate it with a
diagram.
   In the first box of diagram 1 we have our facts, organised as far as possible
into a coherent set of accounts. Given this quantitative framework, we can
formulate some hypotheses, or theories, about the technical and behavioural
relationships that connect them. By combining facts and theories we can
construct a model which when translated into quantitative terms will give us an
idea of how the system under investigation actually works. Since no system
works perfectly we may want to change ours in order to try to improve it. This
implies formulating some aims, and by introducing these aims into our descrip-


116                            Economic Sciences 1984


Diagram 1. Models, policies and plans




tive model we can sketch out a policy. But for practical purposes this is not the
end. The policy model needs to be combined with a set of controls which specify
the way in which we propose to realise the policy, thus enabling us to draw up a
plan. This planning model can now be run through the computer to show us the
probable repercussions of the intended changes throughout the system. But
since no model-builder however sagacious can think of everything and no
model however detailed can reflect all the complexities of the real world, it is
likely that when the plan is actually put into practice, events will reveal its
deficiencies. This experience will lead us to reconsider the facts we took into
account and our methods of recording and measuring them, the theories we
used in relating them, the precise aims we thought desirable, and the controls
to be used in achieving these aims. As experience feeds back to modify facts,
theories, aims and controls, so the whole picture will change and hopefully we
shall get a better model, a better policy and a better plan.
   The process I have described is not just the concern of the scientist. He is
involved in collecting and ordering facts, in formulating theories and in build-
ing models. But aims and policies are primarily the concern of the politician,
and controls and plans are primarily the concern of the administrator. It is not
easy for these three to understand each other and there is a pressing need to
diminish the difficulties of communication between them.
   Diagram 1 brings out the ultimate purpose of the work which is my main
concern in this lecture and is represented by the box labelled ‘facts’. In the
remainder of what I have to say I shall not stray far outside this box. But before
describing its contents and discussing how they can be further elaborated it
may be of some interest if I place them in their historical perspective.

2. Precursors
To trace the origins of national economic accounting we must go back to


                                            R. Stone                                           117


seventeenth century England, an age of great intellectual vigour, scientific
curiosity and inventiveness. William Petty, physician, chemist, land surveyor,
cartographer, naval engineer, co-founder of the Royal Society, adviser both to
the Cromwell government and after the Restoration to Charles II and, above
all, political arithmetician, was one of the more remarkable products of that
remarkable century. In 1664, largely with the object of making the tax system
more equitable, he wrote a paper entitled Verbum Sapienti in which, after saying
that ‘just accounts might be kept of the People, with the respective Increases
and Decreases of them, their Wealth and Foreign Trade’, he proceeded to give
the first known estimates of what may be called balances of the national
economy [17].
   Petty’s figures, reached by ingenious extrapolation, are limited to a very
small number of basic magnitudes but his ideas are sound. He equates income
to expenditure, which he identifies with `Expense for Food, Housing, Clothes,
and all other necessaries’. This he estimates at £40 million for the population of
England and Wales, which he puts at 6 million inhabitants. He then estimates
the income yielded by land at £8 million and that yielded by ‘other Personal
Estates’ at £7 million. ‘Now,’ he says, ‘if the Annual Proceed of the Stock, or
Wealth of the Nation, yields but 15 Millions and the Expense be 40, then the
Labour of the People must furnish the other 25’. The reasoning is impeccable.
His figures can be set out as an account with four entries, as in table 1.

Table 1. William Petty’s original estimates, 1664

Income                                                 Expense

From Land                                   8          Food, Housing, Clothes, and all other
From other Personal Estates                 7            necessaries                            40
From the labour of the People              25
Total                                      40          Total                                    40


   The only objection that can be made to Petty’s figures is that the £25 million
of labour income is not estimated independently but obtained as a residual in
order to balance the account. However, he supports it by a calculation which
gives an estimate for average daily earnings of 7 pence per head, and this seems
reasonable enough for his time.
   Table 1 is an example of Petty’s ‘political arithmetick’, which his contempo-
rary Charles Davenant defined as ‘the art of reasoning by figures upon things
relating to government’ [7]. Although most of Petty’s numerous writings on the
subject were published posthumously, his manuscripts were widely circulated
in his life-time and his method found a number of followers. Of these by far the
most important in my context was Gregory King.
   King was a herald by profession and seems to have worked out his estimates
for his own curiosity. Had it not been for the invaluable Charles Davenant, who
was a friend and great admirer of his and introduced many of his estimates,
with due acknowledgement, in his own books, King’s writings would have lain
in obscurity until 1802, when they were rediscovered and published by George
Chalmers [12]. One of his most fascinating tables relates to the income,


Table 2. A Scheme of the Income & Expense of the several Families of England Calculated for the Year 1688
Ranks, Degrees, Titles and
Qualifications


Temporall Lords                                      160 40
Spiritual Lords                                       26 20
Baronets                                             800 16
Knights
Esquires
Gentlemen
Persons in greater Offices and Places
Persons in lesser Offices and Places
Eminent Merchants & Traders by Sea
Lesser Merchants & Traders by Sea
Persons in the Law
Eminent Clergymen
Lesser Clergy-men
Freeholders of the better sort
Freeholders of the lesser sort
Farmers
Persons in Liberal Arts and Sciences
Shopkeepers and Tradesmen
Artisans and Handicrafts
Naval Officers
Military Officers                                                      16000 60
                                                                     2675520 67
Common Seamen
Labouring People & outservants
Cottagers & Paupers
Common Soldiers

Vagrants



So the General Account is




* Note: This column does not appear in the original.
Source: Gregory King, Two Tracts, edited by G. E. Barnett, Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore, 1936, p. 31 (amended)


Table 3. The General Account of England, France & Holland for the Years 1688 & 1695
                                               Totals (f million)                                      Per head (f’s)
                                               1688                   1695                             1688                   1695
                                               England France Holland England France Holland           England France Holland England France Holland




                                                                                    74.0     18.25
                                                        70.0                                10.50
                                                        10.5                                 6.90




Source: Gregory King, Two Tracts, edited by G.E. Barnett, The Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore, 1936, p. 55 (amended)


120                             Economic Sciences 1984


expenditure and saving of the population of England in 1688, divided into
twenty-six social classes ranging from temporal lords to vagrants [ 1 , p. 3 1; 8, p.
23]. A version of it, slightly amended and converted to decimal currency, is set
out in table 2.
   Evidently King’s main purpose in drawing up this table was to find out the
contribution made to wealth by the various groups in society. Thus we see that
rather less than half the population, with a combined income of £34.5 million,
saved, thereby increasing the wealth of the kingdom; while rather more than
half, with a combined income of £9 million, overspent their income, thereby
decreasing the wealth of the kingdom. Incidentally, I should perhaps explain
that the term families is the equivalent of what we now call households; it does
not mean that peers had an average of 38 children and bishops an average of
18.
   Another of King’s tables which is worth reproducing here is his comparison
between England and her two political and commercial rivals, France and
Holland [l , p. 55]. It is the first example of the use of national accounts for
international comparisons and is set out with slight amendments in table 3.
   Table 3 enables many comparisons to be made both over space and over
time. France, with its relatively large population, has by far the largest income
whereas Holland has the smallest; in terms of income per head, however, the
position is reversed. The English appear as great consumers of meat and beer,
the Dutch seem to prefer poultry and fish to meat, and the French definitely
prefer wine to beer. In all three countries, saving falls in wartime but remains
positive in Holland. Taxes are much higher in Holland than in the other two
countries though in all three countries they increase greatly in wartime. King
projected his estimates to 1698 and concluded that the war could not be
continued beyond that date. He was quite right: the War of the League of
Augsburg lasted from 1689 to 1697.
   After this brilliant start all thoughts of balanced accounts seem to have
evaporated. However, sporadic attempts at estimating some of their constitu-
ent parts, especially income, were made with increasing frequency throughout
the eighteenth, nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. To begin with, two
French contemporaries of King, Pierre de Boisguillebert and Marshal Vauban,
working independently of each other, published estimates of the national
income of France to support their contention that the tax system was injurious
to the welfare of the country and needed reforming [2 ; 30]. Their efforts might
have led to interesting developments if they had not been strangled at birth:
Louis XIV disapproved, and their books were suppressed. Nothing of note
happened in England until Arthur Young’s income estimates of 1770, which
were based on very loose calculations of output [31]. At the turn of the century
three estimates based mainly on consumption were made in Russia [23] but
met with the same fate as had befallen the early French ones.
   The nineteenth century saw further progress, data became more abundant,
and by the end of the century income estimates were available for some twenty
countries, many of them prepared by M. G. Mulhall and published in £’s
sterling in successive editions of his Dictionary of Statistics from 1884 onwards


                                     R. Stone                                   121


[16]. Some were based on income and some on output statistics and many of
them were rather crude; but they served to stimulate interest in the study of
national income and in international comparisons.
   Apart from statistical estimates, two conceptual innovations which are re-
levant to my theme should be mentioned at this point. In 1758 Francois
Quesnay, Louis XV’s physician, conceived his ingenious Tableau Économique
[18] which is now regarded as the beginning of the analysis of intersectoral
flows. And about a century later Karl Marx carried out his analysis of simple
and extended reproduction which appeared in 1885, shortly after his death, in
volume II of Das Kapital [15].
   After the first world war the statistical pace accelerated. In the early 1920’s
the Central Statistical Administration of the Soviet Union compiled a large
body of data on material outputs and their uses, cast in the form of an input-
output table for 1923-24, as a basis for planning production. This was pub-
lished in 1926 and the names associated with it are those of V. G. Groman and
P. I. Popov [28; 9]. Similar work continued until 1932.
   By this time national income estimation was flourishing. I shall mention in
particular the contributions of A. L. Bowley in England [3] and of Simon
Kuznets in the United States [14]. But the restoration of the synthetic vision of
the political arithmeticians came in the 1930’s with the work of Colin Clark
who in 1937, in his National Income and Outlay [5] brought together estimates of
income, output, consumers’ expenditure, government revenue and expendi-
ture, capital formation, saving, foreign trade and the balance of payments.
Although he did not set his figures in an accounting framework it is clear that
they came fairly close to consistency. Clark was my teacher at Cambridge and
his work was the main source of inspiration for mine. Early in the second world
war his estimates were updated by Erwin Rothbarth for Keynes, who used
them as the statistical framework of How to Pay for the War [11].
   In 1941, estimates of British national income and expenditure, which James
Meade and I had worked out as civil servants in the War Cabinet Offices, were
published at the instigation of Keynes in a White Paper entitled An Analysis of
the Sources of War Finance and an Estimate of the National Income and Expenditure in
1938 and 1940 which was issued at the time of the budget [25]. In the same year
Gruenbaum (Gaathon) published his National Income and Outlay in Palestine,
1936, which was also set in an accounting framework [10], and Van Cleeff in
Holland published two papers on a system of national bookkeeping [29].
   Thus, as so often happens, the idea was in the air and made its appearance in
several guises at the same time. At this point I shall conclude my historical
narrative and turn to the theory and practice of national economic accounting
as it is today.

3. Concepts and Definitions
An economic system is one in which goods and services are produced with the
ultimate object of satisfying human wants. Production, the bringing into being of
goods and services, takes place in farms, factories, shops and the like, and the
total product of any period is divided into two parts: intermediate product,


122                            Economic Sciences 1984

which is absorbed in the productive process, and final product, which is sold
outside the productive system.
   Final product in its turn is divided into two parts. The first and largest flows
into consumption, the using up of goods and services within the period of account,
say a year. The second flows into accumulation for use in the future and consti-
tutes an addition to wealth. Most of this second flow goes to maintain and
increase the country’s stock of fixed assets, such as buildings, machinery,
vehicles and so on; the remainder consists of stocks of products intended for
intermediate or final use which have not in fact been used up in the year and so
are available for use in the future. Since the whole of final product is either
consumed within the period or accumulated for the future, it follows that final
product equals consumption plus accumulation.
   Production, consumption and accumulation are the three basic forms of
economic activity; in an isolated economy they would form a closed system of
flows. But the economies of actual countries are not isolated, and so transac-
tions with other economies have to be brought into the picture. The production
of a given country is supplemented by imports, and all the final product of a
country is not exhausted by domestic consumption and accumulation but in
part flows abroad as exports. Thus we must record all transactions of that
country’s production, consumption, and accumulation with the rest of the world
as well as with one another.
   This network of flows can be set out in four interlocking accounts which show
the basic structure of a country’s economic system. A highly concentrated
version of these accounts is given in table 4. Before considering it, however, we
should try to define our terms.
   To begin with production, what should we include in it? We might agree that
we wanted to include in it all the goods and services intended for sale valued at
their market price. But this leaves out non-market activities which are impor-
tant in all societies. Consider first the non-trading activities of government,
such as public administration, defence, education and health services. Since
these services are not sold they can only be valued at cost. In the present state
of knowledge it is virtually impossible to approximate their value to their users
in any other way. In adopting this basis of valuation we must accept the fact
that nothing like a profit or loss can appear in respect of these services: clearly,
if a service never comes on the market there cannot be a market criterion of the
scale on which it should be provided. Nevertheless it is agreed that the output
of these services, valued at cost, should appear as part of production in the
national accounts.
   Household and amateur activities present an even more difficult case. Al-
 though these activities often take the form of production, as in cooking a meal
or redecorating a house, their output does not have a measurable cost, since
household members and amateurs give their services for nothing; these services
are innumerable and unrecorded; in general they are not very well defined and
merge imperceptibly into the activity of living. This being so, until recently it
has been generally agreed that household and amateur activities should not be
included in production and should not be accounted for.


                                      R. Stone                                    123


   This treatment, whereby commercial products are valued at market price,
government services are valued at cost and unpaid household activities are
simply ignored, is not a matter of principle but of practical convenience. It can
be defended, therefore, only on practical grounds. First, the market economy,
augmented by government services, is an interesting and useful object of study
in itself. Second, the methods suggested for valuing the output of non-market
activities, though they do not provide an independent measure of their value
either to the user or to the community at large, tend to improve the measure-
ment of costs. And third, there is very little information for measuring or
valuing unpaid household and amateur activities. The position is changing,
however, partly through the collection of more information, for example on the
use of time, and partly through the development of optimising models which
can distinguish between cost to the producer and value to the user, so we may
hope to be able eventually to increase the coverage of the concept of produc-
tion.
   Obviously the task of measurement is eased in societies in which the bulk of
production takes place in producing units such as factories which are clearly
distinguished from consuming units such as households, and where the division
of labour and the use of money have been developed. In general, the existence
of institutional distinctions is helpful in collecting data, whereas if there is only
one type of institution, the household, in which everything takes place, we run
into the difficulties I have outlined.
   The next question is, what is consumption? We might define it as the
 purchase of final products for use within the period of account. As far as
 perishable goods are concerned this would not lead to much error. But with the
 increasing importance of durable goods such as private cars, domestic appli-
 ances, television sets and so on, what is bought in a year will not be wholly
 consumed in it but will be available at the end of the year to render further
 services in the future. Yet by convention all such goods are included in
 consumption. It would be better to treat at least the major durables as capital
goods and include in consumption only the year’s depreciation. The excess of
 their purchase price over their depreciation would then appear as part of saving
 on the outlay side of the account.
    What I have just said brings me to accumulation. Here again we are on
 shifting ground. Formerly it was usual to restrict capital goods to income-
earning assets such as buildings, plant, and machinery and industrial vehicles.
Later it was decided to include also government assets which do not yield an
 income, such as roads, bridges, schools and hospitals. Only now is there a move
 to include consumer durables among capital goods. In fact the distinction
 between consumption goods and capital goods is coming more and more to
 depend on durability rather than on the existence of a money return.
    An important conceptual problem in connection with accumulation is the
 measurement of depreciation. This depends on the expected life of the asset, the
 rate at which it is likely to wear out and the price at which each successive stage
 is to be valued. Estimates of useful life can never be certain: with well-
 established types of asset, past experience is quite a good guide, but with new


124                                 Economic Sciences 1984

types the estimate can be little more than a guess. The rate at which assets wear
out is usually estimated on one of two assumptions: either that this rate is
uniform throughout the expected life, or that at each successive stage it repre-
sents a uniform proportion of the remaining life. It makes a good deal of
difference which method is chosen. In private accounting it has been customary
to value depreciation by reference to the original cost of the asset. This works
well enough in times of stable prices, but in times of changing prices, particu-
larly if the changes are predominantly in one direction, it is better to use
replacement cost, and this is the practice followed in national accounting.
   The valuation of investment in stocks also presents a problem. This part of
investment represents the value of the increase or decrease in the quantities of
unused or unsold products held by the productive system at the end of the
period. This must be distinguished from stock appreciation, which reflects the
increase or decrease that has taken place during the period in the prices of the
goods held in stock. Stock appreciation is a capital gain and belongs among
capital transactions and not among the sources of income. The sum of invest-
ment in stocks and stock appreciation is equal to the increase in the value of
stocks.
   After what I have just said you may well ask, what then is the exact
definition of production, consumption and accumulation? The answer is that
the matter is still being debated but that in the meantime most people are
agreed that the definitions adopted in the United Nations system of national
accounts are serviceable and flexible enough to cover a wide range of situations.

4. The National Economic Accounts
I shall now describe the national economic accounts as they are now. By way of
illustration I shall make use of the numerical examples given in A System of
National Accounts (or SNA for short) published by the United Nations in 1968
[26]. My first example is shown in table 4.

Table 4. The four economic accounts of our country in year 6 (money values)

1. Production (Domestic Product Account)

Outgoings                                           Incomings

  1. Gross income payments (value                    3. Sales of consumption goods (6)     210
     added) (9)                          255        4. Sales o f capital goods ( 1 2)       47
 2. Purchases o f imports (18)            54         5. Sales o f exports (16)              52
      Total                              309            Total                              309

 2. Consumption (Income and Outlay Account)

 Outgoings                                          Incomings

  6. Purchases of consumption goods                  9. Gross income receipts from do-
     (3)                                 210            mestic production (1)              255
  7. Saving (15)                           27       10. less Provisions for the consump-
  8. Net current transfers abroad                       tion of fixed capital (13)         -19
      (19)                                  4       11. Net distributed factor incomes
                                                        from abroad (17)                     5
      Total                              241            Total                              241


                                          R. Stone                                   125


3. Accumulation (Capital Transactions Account)

Outgoings                                            Incomings

12. Purchases of capital goods (4)      47           15. Saving (7)                   27
13. less Provisions for the consump-
    tion of fixed capital (10)         -19
14. Net lending abroad (20)             -1
    Total                               27              Total                        27



4. The Rest of the World (Balance of’ Payments Account)

Outgoings                                            Incomings

16. Purchases of exports (5)             52          18. Sales of imports (2)         54
17. Net distributed factor income                    19. Net current transfers (8)     4
    payments (11)                         5          20. Net borrowing (14)          - 1
    Total                                57              Total                        57



   The accounts in table 4 form a closed system which includes the whole
world. What I have termed ‘our country’ is a fictitious country, and the figures,
although derived from actual data, are to be taken only as examples. There are
ten independent entries, but as each entry appears twice, once as an outgoing
and once as an incoming, the numbering of the items goes from 1 to 20; the
position of the contra-entries is indicated by the numbers in brackets.
   The first panel contains the flows into and out of production. On the left are
costs; the first item consists of income, that is wages, salaries, interest, profits,
and rent, paid to the factors of production, labour, capital, and land, plus
provisions for depreciation plus indirect taxes (net) paid to government; the
second item represents purchases of imports. On the right are revenues, con-
sisting of the proceeds from sales of goods and services to consumption, sales of
capital goods to accumulation and sales of exports to the rest of the world. The
account is presented in consolidated form, that is to say all transactions
occurring inside it, such as purchases and sales of intermediate products
between industries, are cancelled out. Thus the value of intermediate products
does not appear; however, as we shall see, it can be retrieved by disaggregating
the single account into two or more.
   The second panel contains the flows into and out of consumption. On the left
are outlays: the first is expenditure on goods and services, which we have
already met as a source of revenue in the production account; the second is
saving, which is simply the excess of income over outlay; and the third repre-
sents gifts and other remittances to the rest of the world. On the right are the
constituents of income: by far the largest is the income received from produc-
tion; to this is added factor income received from the rest of the world, that is
dividends, profits, interest and rent arising from property owned abroad;
finally there is a negative figure representing provisions for the depreciation of
fixed assets, which must be subtracted from gross income to obtain the true, net
value of the national income. Again, all flows occurring inside the account,
such as taxes paid by companies and persons to government, and subsidies and


126                                  Economic Sciences 1984


benefits paid by government to companies and persons, are consolidated away
but can be retrieved by disaggregation.
  The third panel contains the flows into and out of accumulation. On the left,
the first item represents gross investment in tangible assets; the second shows
the depreciation which must be subtracted to obtain net investment; and the
third represents net lending abroad, where the minus sign indicates that in the
period of account our country borrowed from the rest of the world more than it
lent. On the right is saving, which finances net investment. All lending and
borrowing between different transactors inside the account are consolidated
away.
   The fourth panel contains the transactions between the rest of the world and
our country. These are presented from the point of view of the rest of the world,
so that all the items which appear as outflows on the left of this account will be
found as inflows in the three domestic accounts and vice versa. The myriads of
transactions occurring outside our country do not appear at all.
   With only four accounts it is a simple matter to follow the relationships
between the entries, but as the number of accounts is increased this becomes
more and more difficult and it is convenient to display the accounts in the form
of a matrix in which each row-and-column pair represents an account, with
incomings in the rows and outgoings in the columns. This is done in table 5.

Table 5. The four economic accounts of our country in matrix form (money values)

                                1             2               3      4             Total

1. Production                                210              47     52            309
2. Consumption                 255                       -19             5         241
3. Accumulation                               27                                    27
4. The rest of the world        54                4      - 1                        57

      Total                    309           241              27     57


   The entries in this table are the same as those in table 4. The advantage of
this form of presentation is obvious: there is no need for contra-entries. Each
item appears only once, at the intersection of a row and a column; read
horizontally it represents an incoming into the account specified on the left of
the row; read vertically it represents an outgoing from the account specified at
the top of the column. Thus the entry of 210 in row 1 and column 2 represents
sales of consumer goods and services, which is an incoming into production and
an outgoing from consumption.
   I shall now show how the content of the system can be increased and how it
is possible to introduce balance sheets for assets and liabilities (stocks) along-
side the transactions (flows) which appear in the accounts. This is done by
dividing each account into two or more and at the same time bordering the
original matrix with rows and columns containing assets, liabilities and their
revaluations. The result is shown in table 6.
   In this table the central square contains a minimal disaggregation of the
accounts shown in table 5, and the outer rows and columns contain the balance
sheets and revaluations. As a result of disaggregation it becomes possible to fill


Table 6. A primary disaggregation of our country’s accounts. including balance sheets (money values)

                                                 1       2       1     4       5        6        7   8    9    10         11    12    13        14    15   16

Opening assets      1 Financial claims                                                                         1,249            165
                    2 Net tangible assets                                                                        661
Production          3 Commodities                                      245     166               6   41                   50
                    4 Activities                                 143               44
Consumption          5 Consumer goods/purposes                                          210                                2
                    6 Income and outlay                          14    241                                      -19       13
Accumulation         7 Increase in stocks                                                                             6
                    8 Fixed capital formation                                                                       41
                     9 Financial claims                                                                             58           18
                    10 Capital finance           1,217    693                               27            59                          -23       44    1,253 764

The rest of         11 Current transactions                      51        1        2       12
the world           12 Capital transactions          197 - 3 2                                            17               1                0   - 2    214 -33

Revaluations        13 Financial claims                                                                         -21             - 2
                    14 Net tangible assets                                                                          42
Closing assets      15 Financial claims                                                                        1,286      181
                    16 Net tangible assets                                                                       731


128                            Economic Sciences 1984


in the four diagonal submatrices which were empty in table 5. In order to
indicate how a matrix of this kind is to be interpreted I shall give a brief
explanation of the entries in rows and columns 3 and 4, which taken together
constitute the production account.
   Row and column 3 relate to commodities, that is to goods and services
produced by industries for the market; row and column 4 relate to activities,
that is to the production of market commodities by industries and of non-
market services by government. Purchasers buy market goods and services
from the commodity account and government services from the activity ac-
count; incomes are paid out of the activity account. The reason for showing
commodities and activities separately is that most industries produce more
than one commodity, so that the distinction is useful in input-output analysis.
   Row 3 shows the destinations of commodities: 245 money units flow into
activities as intermediate inputs; 166 flow into consumption as current goods
and services; (6 + 41) = 47 flow into accumulation as capital goods; and 50
flow to the rest of the world as exports. Column 3 shows the sources of these
commodities: 443 are produced by domestic activities; and 65 flow in from the
rest of the world, their value being made up of 51 units of imports before tax
plus 14 units of import duties. A little arithmetic shows at once that the row
and the column balance: (245 + 166 + 6 + 41 + 50) = (443 + 14 + 51) = 508.
   Row 4 shows the total output of commodities by industries, which amounts
to 443 money units, and of non-market services by government, which amounts
to 44. Column 4 shows the inputs, or costs, connected with these activities:
purchases of intermediate products, amounting to 245; payments of factor
incomes, depreciation and indirect taxes (net), amounting to 241; and factor
income paid abroad, amounting to 1. Again, the row and the column balance:
 (443 + 44) = (245 + 241 + 1) = 487.
   By a suitable grouping of the domestic flows in the central square of table 6 it
is possible to revert to the figures of table 5. If the diagonal entries are removed
and the off-diagonal ones are added together, submatrix by submatrix, we
obtain: for the first row, (166 + 44) = 210 and (6 + 41) = 47; for the second
row, (14 + 241) = 255 and -19; for the third row, 27. The flows in which the
rest of the world is involved do not tally, however; the reason lies in the
simplified treatment of the flows in table 5.
   Turning to the balance sheets and revaluations that surround the central
square of table 6, a full explanation of all the entries would be out of place here,
so I shall again limit myself to a few indications. The purpose of balance sheets
is to show the value of the stocks of financial claims and tangible assets at the
beginning and end of the period of account. The opening value of these stocks is
shown from different points of view in rows and columns 1 and 2. Their closing
value, after the transactions of the period and after revaluations, is shown in
rows and columns 15 and 16.
   We see in column 1 that at the beginning of the period the value of all
financial claims, that is shares, loans, bank deposits, money etc., issued as
liabilities by our country was 1217, and the value of claims issued by the rest of
the world but held in our country was 197. Conversely, we see in row 1 that the


                                      R.   Stone                                129


value of claims held as assets in our country irrespective of where they were
issued was 1249, and of claims held in the rest of the world but issued in our
country was 165. Thus the total opening value of these financial claims was
(1217 + 197) = (1249 + 165) = 1414, but our country’s holding of its own
claims was (1249 - 197) = (1217 - 165) = 1052.
   Net tangible assets, valued at written-down replacement cost, appear in row
2. In this example they are restricted to assets located in our country, irrespec-
tive of ownership. Thus if a foreign company owns a factory in our country, this
forms part of our stock of tangible assets; at the same time its value is included
among our liabilities in column 1 and among the rest of the world’s holding of
financial assets in row 1. The example implies that while the rest of the world
may own tangible assets in our country, we do not own tangible assets abroad.
If we did they would appear at the intersection of row 2 and column 12 and
their value would be added to the rest of the world’s liabilities on one side and
to our holding of financial assets on the other.
   Net tangible assets in row 2 are balanced by net worth (or wealth) in column
2. Net worth measures the excess of all assets, tangible and financial, over
liabilities. Our country’s net worth is shown to be 693; and the net worth of the
rest of the world in so far as its dealings with us are concerned is shown as -32,
indicating that our holding of foreign claims is larger by 32 than the rest of the
world’s holding of our claims.
   Row and column 13 show the revaluation of issues and holdings of financial
claims so as to bring them to a common basis of current values. Row 14 shows
the revaluation of net tangible assets for the same purpose. The revaluation of
net worth cannot be estimated independently and the figures depend on the
revaluation of tangible assets and claims.
   The system of table 6 can be further elaborated by introducing more classifi-
cations into the basic framework. Anyone interested in pursuing the matter will
find a full discussion of it in [26, pp. 8-11].

5. Statistical Problems
Filling the framework of the national accounts with figures means solving a
large number of statistical problems. There are two stages in this process.
   The first is to bring together the relevant information. In many countries
accounting data proper are likely to be available for government activities, and
in some cases the accounts of large companies may also have been standar-
dised. But apart from this the data will be mainly statistical; they are likely to
be very voluminous and mostly collected for other purposes; and as sources for
the construction of national accounts they are sure to be incomplete, inconsis-
tent and of varying reliability. Consequently when we bring together all this
material we shall always find discrepancies and gaps.
   The second stage is to find some way of dealing with these discrepancies and
gaps. The gaps can often be filled residually. For instance, if we can estimate all
the entries in the personal income and outlay account except saving, then this
can be measured as the excess of income over the sum of all the other outlays.
This is not very satisfactory, however, since it means that we use up one of the


130                            Economic Sciences 1984


constraints of the system to estimate saving, and so this constraint is no longer
available to help in checking the accuracy of the system as a whole.
   As regards discrepancies, the common practice is to add them in on one side
of the account. For instance, if the data on expenditure yield a total greater
than the total yielded by the data on income, the difference is often added to the
income side of the account as an unidentified item. This is not very satisfactory
either, since it is most unlikely that the statistics of expenditure are accurate
and all the error lies in the statistics of income, and again we waste a constraint.
A better approach is to find some means of adjusting all the entries in the light
of our ideas about their reliability.
   This can be done by the well-known procedure of adjusting conditioned
observations by the method of least squares. In 1942 David Champernowne
and James Meade joined me in writing a paper in which we proposed the
application of this method to the adjustment of the national accounts [22]. The
method requires a knowledge of the relative reliability of each entry in the
accounting matrix and this information can be set out in a variance matrix of
order equal to the number of entries. Given this, we can calculate the adjust-
ments to the entries which will minimise their sum of squares weighted by the
reciprocals of their variances so that the adjusted estimates satisfy the con-
straints of the system, namely that accounts balance, components sum to totals,
final estimates are single-valued, and so on. This application has only been
taken up in recent years, partly, I think, because the only available estimates of
reliability are subjective ones based on the impressions of their compilers and
partly because of the amount of computing involved. As far as I know, the first
application was published by Ray Byron in 1978 [4].
   As an example of the method, table 7 sets out the results of my attempt to
balance an aggregated version of the British national accounts for the year 1969
[21]
   The entries in table 7 are arranged in pairs; in each pair the upper figure (in
roman type) is derived from the official estimates for 1969 published in [24],
and the lower (in italics) gives the adjusted value. The effect of the adjustments
can be seen in row E at the bottom of the table: the upper row of figures shows
the residual error and other unidentified items included in the official estimates
in order to balance the accounts; the lower row is composed of zeros. This is a
step in the right direction. But consistent estimates are not necessarily accurate
estimates. Accuracy depends on the correctness of the variance matrix, the
importance of systematic errors, which could be allowed for but are not in the
above example, and experience, which may bring out unforeseen difficulties.

6. Regional Accounts
The accounting system I am describing is usually applied to individual coun-
tries, but with some elaboration it could be applied to the regions of a country
or to the regions of the world. Whichever way we go, new problems arise. I
shall mention some of these but not discuss them in detail.
   If we consider the regions of a country, there is first the definition of the
regions to be decided on; then it must be recognised that some transactors, such


Tab/e 7. A version of the British national accounts with the errors shown explicitly: initial and finally adjusted estimates for 1969 (£ million)
                                    1        2       3       4        5       6       7        D       8         9      IO      11         12       13
      I. Britain                          10 109   3 233                    7 997                    1297      4167   1414    2286                              56 503
                                          10117    9 286                    7 999                    1316      4320   1414    2286                              56 738
      2. Rest of the world       9930                                                                                                                            9930
                                 9 922                                                                                                                           9 922

      3. Persons                  31290                      35            3 937     341 3864                                                                   39 467
                                 ‘1230                       35            3936      341 3864                                                                   39 406
      4. Companies               3815                                               1161  1619                                                                   6 595
                                 3 798                                              1164 1615                                                                    6581
      5. Public corporations       445                                                15    80                                                                     540
                                    445                                               15    80                                                                     540
      6. General govern-
         ment                    7 488             7 420 1131       610              203      176                                                               17028
                                 7487              7422 1131        610              203      176                                                               17029
      7. Rest of the world                -179      416   458                554                                                                                 1 249
                                          -195       415  458                554                                                                                 1232
     D. Dividends and
        interest n.e.s.                             761 3306         120 1552                                                                                     5 739
                                                    761 3306         120 1552                                                                                     5 739

      8. Persons                  812              1637                                                                         186                               2 635
                                  804              J 522                                                                        186                               2512
      9. Companies               1553                      1665                                                                 606                               3 824
                                 1532                      1651                                                                 606                               3 789
      0. Public corporations     1024                              -190                                    6     14              50                                904
                                 1024                              -190                                    6     14              50                                 904
      1. General govern-
         ment                      496                                     2 988                      577       48       0                                       4 109
                                   496                                     2 988                      577       48       0                                       4109
      2. Rest of the world                                                          -471                                             0                           -471
                                                                                    -491                                             0                           -491
      3. Net acquisitions of
         fin. assests                                                                                1810 -1407       -514      975      -864                            0
                                                                                                      613 - 593       -510      981      -491                            0

     E. Errors                   -350                                                                1055 1002            4       6       393                        0
                                     0                                                                  0    0            0       0         0                        0

     Totals                      56503    9930     9467    6595     540 17028       1249    5 739    2635      3824    904    4109       -471        C
                                 56 738   992.2    9406    6581     540 17029       1232    5739     2512      3789    904    4109       -491        0
Note. The noughts in cells 11.10 and 12.11 refer respectively to net capital transfers to general government from public corporations and net capital transfers abroad
from general government. In 1969 these items happened to be zero but this is not always the case.


132                             Economic Sciences 1984


as the central government, have no obvious regional location; and, again,
information on many interregional flows is not generally available and may be
costly to collect. In spite of this a number of countries have succeeded in
constructing regional accounts. Indeed, regional accounting was one of the
topics considered when the 1968 revision of the SNA was being discussed, but
with the many other more pressing extensions to be carried out this one was left
over for the future.
   If we try to integrate the accounts for individual countries into an accounting
framework for a region of the world, say Europe, or for the whole world, we
come up against the problem of national diversity. First, the statistics of
different countries do not form a coherent system: thus, the exports from
country A to country B as recorded by A may not agree with the imports of B
from A as recorded by B, even when adjusted for differences in valuation.
Second, it is necessary to find a common unit of account; crude results can be
obtained by using exchange rates to convert all national currencies to a single
one, but exchange rates do not necessarily reflect purchasing power. What is
required are the methods of comparing currencies pioneered by Colin Clark in
 The Conditions of Economic Progress [6], which find their latest expression in the
UN’s International Comparison Project [13]. Third, d i fferent countries use different
accounting systems. Most market economies use systems sufficiently close to
the SNA to make harmonisation fairly easy, but for a world picture it would be
necessary to relate these accounts to those of the centrally planned economies,
which make use of the alternative System of Material Product Balances (MPS)
going back to Marx and based on Adam Smith’s restricted concept of produc-
tion. The connections between the two systems have been studied by the
Conference of European Statisticians in Geneva and, as I tried to show in ‘A
comparison of the SNA and the MPS' [19], it is possible to construct an
enlarged system from which either of the two can be obtained by an appropri-
ate grouping of the entries. To do this, however, rather more information is
needed than is normally provided in either system. In a co-operative world this
information would not be difficult to obtain, so in the end we may hope to see
accounts for the world economy drawn up on common principles.

7. Demographic Accounts
I shall now leave the economic accounts and turn to demographic accounts.
Demographic accounts, like any other type of account, are based on the
equality of inflows and outflows over a period of time. In the demographic case
the inflows and outflows are composed of human beings who in a given period
enter or leave a country. These human flows move in two dimensions, time and
space. Thus, for any country, this year’s population flows in partly along time
from last year, through survival, and partly along space from the outside world,
through birth and immigration; and flows out partly along space into the
outside world, through death and emigration, and partly along time into next
year, through survival.
   The survivors from the preceding period constitute the opening stock of
population and the survivors into the succeeding period constitute the closing


                                      R. Stone                                  133



stock. In any period, the equality of inflows and outflows implies that the
difference between the opening and the closing stocks is equal to the net inflow
from the outside world.
   The first step in the construction of a system of demographic accounts is to
divide the population into age-groups and, within each age-group, into categor-
ies reflecting any characteristic we may be interested in: activity, socioeconom-
ic position, health, and so on. Once the data have been organised within a
taxonomic framework they can be presented as entries in an account, showing
on one side in what formation each age-group enters the period, and on the
other how it redistributes itself among the various categories before leaving the
period. The accounting identities connecting flows and stocks will ensure that
the same number of people will flow out of a category as have flowed into it.
   The interaction of different classifications forms a number of composite
categories, or ‘states’, which enable us to subdivide the population into clearly
differentiated groups. Thus if our primary classification is by age, our secon-
dary classification by centre of activity and our third by occupation, examples
of states are: being aged 17, attending grammar school and preparing for
advanced-level examinations; or being aged 30, employed in a brick factory
and working as a clerk.
    In a system as complex as the one we are dealing with, even a relatively
 modest degree of cross-classification can lead to an immense amount of statisti-
 cal detail which will be very hard to handle unless we find some means of
 keeping it under control. This can be achieved by devising a comparatively
 simple set of basic data, which might be thought of as the master set, supported
 by a number of subsidiary sets linked to each other and to the master set by the
 conceptual framework. These subsidiary sets can take the form of ‘life se-
 quences’, each sequence reflecting a particular dimension of life and requiring
 only a limited number of classifications for its description. At the same time,
 each sequence must be so conceived as to be demographically self-contained,
 that is, to be capable of including the whole population.
    In the present state of statistical information the sequence which is most
 amenable to an accounting treatment is that which I have called the ‘active’
 sequence, in which people first learn, then earn and finally retire. In this
 sequence the population can be divided into three main groups: schoolchildren
 and students, members of the labour force, and the rest. This third group
 contains all the educationally and economically inactive: babies, housewives,
 the idle rich, the idle poor, chronic invalids and old-age pensioners. None of
 these people, except perhaps the very young, the very sick and the very old, can
 really be said to be inactive; but their activities cannot formally be listed under
 the headings of learning or earning.
    While flowing through their active sequence, individuals also flow through a
 ‘passive’ sequence, in the sense of a succession of socio-economic groupings to
 which they belong at different times in their life; some of the classifications
 appropriate to this sequence are family size, social class, income group, place of
 residence, race, religion. Another important sequence is the medical sequence,
 in which the population is classified in terms of physical and mental character-


134                                    Economic Sciences 1984


istics. Yet another is the sequence of delinquency, in which the classifications
can range from shop-lifting to murder.
   Having found a practical means of representing each sequence separately, it
then becomes possible to introduce a certain amount of interaction between the
different sequences. For instance, at the educational stage, family background
is an important determinant of educational aspirations and achievement; at
this stage of the active sequence, therefore, it is desirable that some of the
classifications of the passive sequence should interact with those of the active
sequence.
   Let us consider a simple example in which the population of our country is
classified by age and occupation. There are two categories in each class: age is
divided into O-15 and 16+; and occupation is divided into attending school
and all other. Each year individuals can enter a state in several ways: by
survival in that same state from last year, by moving into it from a different
state in the course of the year, by birth or by immigration; and they may leave
it by survival into the next year, by moving into another state during the year,
by emigration or by death. We can represent this system by a set of five
accounts analogous to the four economic accounts given in table 4. This is done
in table 8.

T a b l e 8. The demographic accounts of our country in year 6 classified by age and occupation
(thousands)
State (i). Age-group 0-15 not at school

Inflows                                               Outflows

 1. Survivors from last year                           5. Deaths (29)                         3
    (opening stock) (34)                  2 125        6. School entrants (11)              396
 2. Births surviving into                                               o 16 not
                                                       7. M o v e r s t age
    next year (32)                          435           at school (23)                    140
 3. Immigrants (net) (33)                      1       8. Survivors into next year
 4. School leavers (13)                  1 2 2            (closing stock) (30)           2144
    Total                                 2 683           Total                          2 683


State (ii). Age-group 0-15 at school

Inflows                                               Outflows

 9. Survivors from last year                          12. Deaths (29)                         2
    (opening stock) (34)                  3 798       13. School leavers (4)                122
10. Immigrants (net) (33)                    - 5      14. Movers to age 16
11. School entrants (6)                     396           at school (18)                    106
                                                      15. Movers to age 16 not
                                                          at school (24)                    115
                                                      16. Survivors into next year
                                                          (closing stock) (30)           3844
      Total                               4 189           Total                           4 189


State (iii). Age-group 16+ at school

Inflows                                               Outflows

17. Survivors from last year                          19. School leavers (25)               107
    (opening stock) (34)                    198       20. Survivors into next year
18. E n t r a n t s f r oage
                         m 15                             (closing stock) (30)              197
    at school (14)                         106
    Total                                  304            Total                            304


                                              R.Stone                                         135


State (iv). Age-group 16+ not at school

Inflows                                                 Outflows

21. Survivors from last year                            26. Deaths (29)                       269
    (opening stock) (34)              17020             27. Survivors into next year
22. Immigrants (net) (33)                20                 (closing stock) (30)            17 133
23. Entrants from age 15 not
    at school (7)                         140
24. Entrants from age 15
    at school (15)                      115
25. School leavers (19)              1 0 7
    Total                             17402                 Total                           17402


The outside world

Inflows                                                 Outflows

28. Deaths: infants (31)                    8           31. Births: infant deaths (28)          8
29. Deaths: all others (5+12+26)          274           32. Births: surviving (2)             435
30. Survivors into next year                            33. Immigrants (net) into
    (our country’s closing stock)                           our country (3+10+22)              16
    (8+16+20+27)                      23318             34. Survivors from last year
                                                            (our country’s opening stock)
                                                            (1+9+17+21)                     23141
    Total                             23600                 Total                           23600




   In this table I have set out the accounts for the four socio-demographic states
distinguished in the system and for what I have called ‘the outside world’, a
term which must be interpreted very widely as it includes (a) all countries other
than ours, (b) last year and next year, and (c) the great unknown. As in table 4,
each entry appears twice, once as an inflowd and once as an outflow, and the
contra-entries are indicated by the numbers in brackets. The last account
brings together all the entries that do not constitute inter-state flows and
corresponds to the account for the rest of the world in table 4. Thus table 8
represents a closed system of balancing accounts just as table 4 did.
   By way of introduction to what may seem very unfamiliar concepts I shall
give a detailed explanation of the contents of the first panel. This panel relates
to children aged from 0 to 15 who are not at school. The great majority are little
ones who have not yet started school. At the other end there are boys and girls
who have left school on reaching the school-leaving age and many of whom
may already be in employment. In between there is a small number of children
who do not go to school either because they are being educated at home or
because of some physical handicap.
   On the left side of the account the first entry shows the stock of children not
at school present in our country at the beginning of the year, amounting to
2125; these flow in through time from last year. The second entry shows the
babies born this year who survive to the end of the year, amounting to 435;
these flow in from the great unknown. The third entry shows the net immi-
grants of the year, amounting to 1; these flow in through space from other
countries. Immigrations are shown net of emigrations. The contra-entries for
items 1, 2 and 3 all appear as outflows from the outside world in the last panel
at the bottom of the table. The fourth entry, 122, shows the children who leave


136                                   Economic Sciences 1984


school in the course of the year; these flow in from state (ii) and the contra-
entry appears as one of the outflows in the second panel.
   On the right side of the account the fifth entry, 3, shows those who die and
thus flow out to the great unknown; the contra-entry appears as an inflow in the
last panel. The sixth entry, 396, shows the children who enter school for the
first time and thus flow out to state (ii); the contra-entry appears as an inflow in
the second panel. The seventh entry, 140, shows the 15-year-olds who become
 16 in the course of the year and thus flow out to state (iv); the contra-entry
appears as an inflow in the fourth panel. Finally, the eighth entry, 2 144, shows
the children who survive to the end of the year and flow out into next year
without changing state; the contra-entry appears as an inflow in the fifth panel.
   The remaining panels are to be interpreted in the same way. The only
anomaly is the entry of 8 which appears on both sides in the panel for the
outside world: this represents those who enter and leave our country within the
year, mainly babies born in the year who die before the end of it.
   The data in table 8 can be used to construct a dynamic matrix which shows
how the opening and closing stocks of population in each state are connected to
one another by the movements occurring during the period. This is done in
table 9.

Table 9. A socio-demographic matrix for our country in year 6 based on table 8 (thousands)

                                           Outside Our country                                Closing
                                           world:                                             stocks
                                           births      Ages      Ages     Ages     Ages
                                           and net     o-15      O-15     16+      16+
                                           immigra- Not at At             At       Not at
                                           tions       school    school   school   school
                                                       (i)       (ii)     (iii)    (iv)
Outside world: deaths                              8         3       2         0      269 23318

Our       (i)   Ages 0- 15 not at school      436      1586       122                          2 144
country   (ii) Ages 0- 15 at school           - 5        396     3 753                         3 844
          (iii) Ages 16+ at school             0             0    106      91             0      197
          (iv) Ages 16+ not at school          20        140      115     107      16 751     17 133

Opening stocks                             123141 2125           3 798    198      17020

   It is convenient to begin an explanation of table 9 with the column and row
for state (i). In the column we see that at the beginning of the year the opening
stock of children aged 0 to 15 who were not at school was 2125. Of these, 3 died
in the course of the year; 1586 remained in state (i) throughout the year, though
of course growing a year older; 396 entered school and thus moved to state (ii);
and 140, who had entered the year aged 15, became 16 in the course of it and
thus moved to state (iv). In the row we see that at the end of the year the stock
in state (i) is 2144 and is composed of: the surviving births and net immigra-
tions of the year, (435 + 1) = 436; the children who have not changed state,
1586; and the children who, though remaining in the same age-group, have left
school in the course of the year, 122. A similar statement can be made for each
of the other columns and rows for our country.


                                       R. Stone                                    137


   If we divide the numbers in a column for our country by the column total we
obtain the proportions in which individuals in the state specified at the head of
the column stay where they are or move to other states in the course of the year.
This matrix of transition coefficients is formally similar to a matrix of input-
output coefficients in economics.
   If the transition matrix contains a fine classification by age or can be reduced
to what would have been observed had the population been in stationary
equilibrium, and if the proportions can be interpreted as probabilities, then the
Leontief inverse of this matrix can be considered as the fundamental matrix of
an absorbing Markov chain. After an adjustment of the entries to allow for the
fact that people may die at any time rather than always at the end of an
interval, this fundamental matrix can be related to the lifetable, which plays
such an important role in demography. The entries in the matrix represent
times and each column total represents the life expectancy of an individual
entering the state specified at the head of the column. In the body of the matrix
this total is divided into time spent on average in each state from the one just
entered to the end of life. Thus if in the demographic matrix we distinguished
one or more states relating to, say, childhood, school days, further education,
employment and retirement, we could divide the life-expectancy at any stage in
this progression into times spent on average in the different states.
   The same method can be used in innumerable other applications such as
regional migration, changes of marital status, forms of tenancy, and so on.
Although a classification by age is highly desirable, it is not essential. If it is
absent, however, the problem arises of adjusting the observations to approxi-
mate the conditions of a stationary population. The method can also be applied
to a vintage, that is all the people born in a particular year, and in this case it is
useful to have longitudinal data which make it possible to trace a given sample
of individuals in their progression through life.
   The statistical problems encountered in constructing socio-demographic
matrices are, mutatis mutandis, similar to those encountered in constructing
economic matrices. There is first the assembly of the available information and
the building up of initial estimates; and then the use of an adjustment proce-
dure to fill in gaps and obtain the consistency desirable in final estimates. In
both the economic and the demographic case it is likely that coefficients will
change over time and allowance must be made for this in building models for
forecasting.
   There is much more I could say about demographic accounting but this is
not the place for it. Anyone interested in pursuing the subject will find a full
discussion in the reports I wrote for the OECD and the UN, which were
published in 1971 and 1975 respectively [20, 27].

8. Concluding Remarks
Environmental issues, such as pollution, land use and non-renewable re-
sources, offer plenty of scope for accounting. But I have done little work in this
area and so I shall do no more than mention what I called at the beginning of
my lecture the third pillar on which the study of society should rest.


138                             Economic Sciences 1984


   I should also have liked to say something about model-building in the
economic and social fields, but I felt that this subject lay outside my brief. In
any case my time is coming to an end and so with my warmest thanks to the
Nobel Foundation for the great honour they have done me in inviting me to
give this lecture and to you for listening to me so patiently, I shaIl come to a full
stop.

9. A List of Works Cited
  [l] BARNETT, G.E. (ed.). Two Tracts by Gregory King. Johns Hopkins Press,
          Baltimore, 1936.
  [2] BOISGUILLEBERT, Pierre LE PESANT, Sieur de                    . Le Détail de la
          France, 1695. In Economistes Financiers du XVIIIme Siècle (ed. Eugene
          Daire). Paris, 1843.
  [3] BOWLEY, A.L. Wages and Income in the United Kingdom since 1860. Cam-
          bridge University Press, 1937. See also other works by the same
          author.
  [4] BYRON, Ray P. ‘The estimation of large social account matrices.' Journal
          of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A, vol. 141, pt. 3, 1978, pp. 359-67.
  [5] CLARK, Colin. National Income and Outlay. Macmillan, London, 1937.
  [6] CLARK, Colin. The Conditions of Economic Progress. Macmillan, London:
          1st edition, 1940; 2nd edition, 1951; 3rd edition, 1957.
  [7] DAVENANT, Charles     . Discourses on the Publick Revenues and on the Trade of
          England, 2 vols., London, 1698.
  [8] DAVENANT, Charles. An Essay u pon the Probable Methods of Making a
          People Gainers in the Balance of Trade. James Knapton, London, 1699.
  [9] DAVIES R.W., and S. WHEATCROFT (eds.)               . Materials for a Balance of
          the National Economy of the USSR for 1928-1930. Cambridge University
          Press, forthcoming.
[10] GRUENBAUM (GAATHON), Ludwig                   . National Income and Outlay in
          Palestine, 1936. Economic Research Institute of the Jewish Agency for
          Palestine, Jerusalem, 1941.
[ 11 ] KEYNES, John Maynard        . How to Pay for the War. Macmillan, London,
          1940.
[12] KING, Gregory   . Natural and Political Observations And Conclusions upon the
          State & Condition of England. MS copy dated 1696, B.M., Harl. MSS
          1898. First printed as an appendixo to An Estimate of the Comparative
          Strength of Great Britain by Sir George Chalmers, J. Stockdale, London,
          1802; reprinted i n Two Tracts by Gregory King (ed. G.E. Barnett), Johns
          Hopkins Press, Baltimore, 1936.
[13] KRAVIS, Irving B., and others. United Nations International Comparison
          Project. Phase I, 1975; Phase II, 1978; Phase III, 1982. Johns Hop-
          kins University Press, Baltimore.
[14] KUZNETS, Simon. National Income and Its Composition, 1919-1938, t wo
          vols. National Bureau of Economic Research, New York, 1941. See
          also other works by the same author.
[15] MARX, Karl. Das Kapital, vol. II (ed. F. Engels). Hamburg, 1885.


                                     R.   Stone                               139


[161 MULHALL, Michael G. Dictionary of Statistics. Routledge, London, 1884-
[17] PETTY, Sir William. Verbum Sapienti. Published with The Political Anatomy
         of Ireland, Browne and Rogers, London, 1691. Reprinted in The Eco-
         nomic Writings of Sir William Petty (C.H. Hull ed.), 2 vols., Cambridge
         University Press, 1899.
[18] QUESNAY, Francois. Tableau Économique (ed. and transl. M. Kuczynski
         and R.L. Meek). Macmillan, London; Kelley, New York; 1972.
[19] STONE, Richard. ‘A comparison of the SNA and the MPS.’ In Mathemat-
         ical Models of the Economy and Other Essays. Chapman and Hall, London,
         1970.
[20] STONE, Richard. Demographic A ccounting and Model-Building. O.E.C.D.,
         Paris, 1971.
[21] STONE, Richard. ‘Balancing the national accounts: the adjustment of
         initial estimates - a neglected stage in measurement.’ In Demand
         Equilibrium and Trade (eds. A. Ingham and A.M. Ulph). Macmillan,
         London, 1984.
[22] STONE, Richard, D.G. CHAMPERNOWNE and J.E. MEADE. ‘The
         precision of national income estimates.’ The Review of Economic Studies,
         vol. IX, no. 2, 1942, pp. 11 l-25.
[23] STUDENSKI, Paul. The Income of Nations. New York University Press,
         1958.
[24] UK, CENTRAL STATISTICAL OFFICE. National Income and Expendi-
         ture, 1980 edn. H.M.S.O., London, annually since 1952.
[25] UK, TREASURY. An Analysis of the S ources of War Finance and an Estimate of
         the National Income and Expenditure in 1938 and 1940. H.M.S.O., London,
         1941.
[26] UN, STATISTICAL OFFICE. A System of National Accounts. Studies in
         Methods, series F, no. 2, rev. 3. U. N., New York, 1968.
[27] UN, STATISTICAL OFFICE. Towards a System of Social and Demographic
         Statistics. Studies in Methods, series F, no. 18. U.N., New York, 1975.
[28] USSR, CENTRAL STATISTICAL BOARD. Balance sheet of the national
         economy of the USSR. Transactions of the USSR Central Statistical Board,
         vol. 29, Moscow, 1926. For the input-output table, see The Use of
         Mathematical Methods in Economics (ed. V.S. Nemchinov), Publishing
         House of Socio-Economic Literature, Moscow, 1959; Engl. transl. (ed.
         A. Nove), Oliver and Boyd, Edinburgh and London, 1964.
[29] Van CLEEFF, Ed. ‘Nationale boekhouding: proeve van en jaaroverzicht
         Nederland 1938’, De Economist, no. 718, 1941, pp. 415-24; and ‘Betee-
         kenis en invichtung eener nationale boekhouding’, De Economist, no.
          11, 1941, pp. 608-23.
[30] VAUBAN, Sébastien LE PRESTRE, Seigneur de. Project d’une Dîme
         Royale, 1707. In Economistes Financiers du XVIIIme Siècle (ed. Eugene
         Daire). Paris, 1843.
[31] YOUNG, Arthur. A Six Months’ Tour through the North of England, vol. IV.
         London, 1770.
