225

A RECONSIDERATION OF THE TWENTIETH
CENTURY

Prize Lecture, December 8, 1999 by
ROBERT A.   MUNDELL

Department   of  Economics,   Columbia   University,   New  York,  N.Y.   10027, USA.



By comparison  with past centuries,  the twentieth  has produced extremes. Its earliest part was a 
benign continuation  of the pax of the nineteenth century. But this calm before the storm was 
followed by World War I, communism,  hy- perinflation,  fascism,  depression,  genocide,  World  
War  II,  the  atom  bomb, and the occupation  of Eastern Europe. There followed a period of 
compara- tive stability, punctuated by the balance of terror of the Cold War, the NATO Alliance,  
and  decolonialism. Toward  the  end  of the  century  the  Cold  War ended,  the  Soviet  Empire  
was  dismantled,  democracy  emerged  in  Eastern Europe,  the  Pax  Americana  flourished,  and  
the  euro  came  into  being.  The clue  to  the  twentieth  century  lies  in  the  links  between 
 its first  and  last de- cades,  the bookends of the century.
In  1906, Whitelaw Reid, the U.S. Ambassador  to Britain, gave a lecture  at Cambridge  University  
with  the  title,  The  Greatest  Fact  zn  Modern  History,  in which  the author, a diplomat, 
journalist, and politician, was given as his sub- ject, the rise and development of the United 
States!  It cannot have  been ob- vious then  that the rise of the United States was the “greatest 
fact in modern history” but it was true that in  a matter  of only two centuries  a small colony 
had  become  the  biggest  economy  in  the world. The first decade  of the cen- tury hinted at 
what the last decade confirmed, viz., American preponderance. Forget the 75 years between  1914 and 
1989!
An underlying theme of my lecture today is the role of the United States in what  has  been  aptly 
called  the  “American  century.” I want  to  bring  out  the role of the monetary factor as a 
determinant of political events. Specifically, I will argue that many of the political changes in 
the century have been caused by  little-understood  perturbations   in  the  international   
monetary  system, while these in turn  have been a consequence  of the rise of the United States 
and mistakes of its financial arm, the Federal Reserve System.
The twentieth century began with a highly efficient international monetary system that was 
destroyed in World War I, and its bungled recreation in the in- terwar  period  brought  on  the  
Great  Depression,  Hitler,  and World  War  II. The new arrangements  that succeeded it depended  
more on  the dollar poli- cies of the Federal Reserve System than on the discipline of gold itself. 
When the link to gold was finally severed, the Federal Reserve System was implicated

226                                        Economic  Sciences  1999

in  the  greatest  inflation  the  United  States  has yet  known,  at  least since  the days of 
the  Revolutionary War. Even so, as the  century ends, a relearning pro- cess has created an 
entirely new framework for capturing some of the  advan- tages of the system with which  the  
century began.
The century can be divided into three distinct, almost equal parts. The first part, 1900—1933, is 
the  story of the international gold standard, its breakdown during  the war,  its mismanaged  
restoration  in  the 1920’s,  and  its demise  in the  early 1930’s. The  second  part, 1934—1971,  
starts with  the  devaluation  of the  dollar  and  the  establishment  of  the  $35 gold  price  
and  ends when  the United   States   took   the   dollar   off  gold.  The   third   part  of   
the   century, 1972—1999, starts with the  collapse into flexible exchange rates and continues with 
  the  subsequent  outbreak  of  massive  inflation  and  stagnation  in  the 1970’s, the  
blossoming of supply-side economics in the 1980’s, and the return to  monetary  stability  and   
the  birth  of  the  euro  in  the  1990’s.  The  century ends,  however,  with  our   monetary  
system  in  deficit  compared  to  the  first decade of  the  century and that suggests unfinished  
business for the decades ahead.


I. MISMANAGEMENT  OF THE GOLD STANDARD
The   international  gold  standard  at  the  beginning  of  the  twentieth  century operated  
smoothly  to  facilitate  trade,  payments,  and   capital  movements. Balance of payments were  
kept in equilibrium  at fixed exchange  rates  by an adjustment mechanism that had a high degree of 
automaticity. The  world pri- ce level may have been subject to long-term  trends but annual 
inflation or de- flation rates were low, tended  to cancel out, and preserve the value of money in  
the long run. The system  gave  the  world  a high degree  of monetary inte- gration and stability.
International  monetary  systems,  however,  are  not  static.  They  have  to  be consistent  and  
evolve  with  the  power  configuration  of  the  world  economy. Gold, silver,  and  bimetallic  
monetary standards  had  prospered  best in  a de- centralized  world  where  adjustment  policies 
were  automatic.  But in  the  de- cades leading  up  to World War I,  the central  banks of  the 
great  powers  had emerged as oligopolists in  the system. The  efficiency and  stability of the  
gold standard came to be increasingly dependent on  the discretionary policies of a few significant 
 central  banks.  This  tendency was magnified  by an  order of magnitude  with  the  creation  of  
the  Federal  Reserve  System  in  the  United States in 1913. The  Federal Reserve Board, which 
ran  the system, centralized the  money  power  of  an  economy  that  had  become  three  times 
larger  than either  of  its  nearest  rivals,  Britain   and   Germany.  The   story  of  the   
gold standard  therefore  became  increasingly  the  story  of  the   Federal  Reserve System.
World War I made gold unstable. The instability began when deficit spend-
ing pushed  the European  belligerents off the  gold standard, and gold came to the  United States, 
where the newly created Federal Reserve System mone-

Robert  A.   Mundell                                                    227
tized  it, doubling  the  dollar  price  level  and  halving  the  real value  of gold.' The 
instability  continued when,  after  the war,  the  Federal  Reserve  enginee- red a dramatic  
deflation  in  the recession' of 1920—1921,  bringing  the dollar (and gold)  price  level  60 
percent of the way back  toward  the prewar  equili- brium, a level at which  the Federal Reserve 
kept it until 1929.
It was in this milieu that the rest of the world, led by Germany, Britain, and France,  returned  
to  the  gold  standard.  The  problem  was  that,  with  world (dollar)  prices still 40 percent 
above  their prewar equilibrium,  the real value of gold reserves and supplies was proportionately 
smaller. At the same  time, monetary gold was  badly distributed,  with  half of it in  the United  
States.  In addition, uncertainty over exchange rates and reparations  (which were fixed in gold) 
increased the demand for reserves. In the face of this situation would not  the  increased  demand  
for gold  brought  about  by  a return  to  the  gold standard  bring on a deflation? A few 
economists, like Charles Rist of France, Ludwig von Mises of Austria, and Gustav Cassel" of Sweden, 
thought it would.’ Cassel  (1925)  had been very explicit even before Britain  returned to gold: 
The gold standard, of course, cannot secure a greater stability in the gene- ral  level  of  prices 
 of  a  country   than   the  value  of  gold  itself  possesses. Inasmuch  as the stability of the 
general level of prices is desirable,  our work for a restoration  of the gold standard  must be 
supplemented  by endeavours to  keep  the value  of gold as constant  as possible  ... With  the 
actual  state  of gold  production  it can  be  taken  for certain  that after a comparatively  
short time,  perhaps within  a decade,  the  present  superabundance of gold will  be followed, as 
a consequence  of increasing demand, by a marked scarcity of this
precious metal tending  to cause a fall of prices ...
After gold had been restored, Cassel pursued his line of reasoning further,



' From a formal point of view it could be argued that the United States suspended  the gold stan- 
dard when, between September 1917 and June 1918, President Wilson  barred the free export of gold,  
using,  “oddly  enough,”  the  Espionage  Act  of  June  1917   (Roy Jastram,  1981  p.  124) . 
However,  the domestic convertibility of notes into gold remained legal so that as far as the 
public was concerned,  the gold standard  remained in force.
’ It was this episode  of instability of the dollar and gold  that led John  Maynard  Keynes,  in  
his  A
Tract  on Monetary  Reform  (Keynes,  1925) ,  to pounce  on  the conflict  between  “internal” and 
“ex- ternal” stability. With the value of gold failing in half, and then soaring in the postwar 
deflation, it seemed  to  be an  unstable  anchor  for other currencies.  On  the  basis of  this 
episode,  Keynes championed  internal  stability  (a stable price level)  over external stability  
(a fixed exchange  rate or gold price), largely on  the basis that the Federal Reserve  Board would 
dominate  an interna- tional system and that it had not yet proved its capacity for capable 
management.
'  I have discussed  this issue in my paper delivered  on the occasion  of the centenary of the 
birth of Jacques  Rueff.  (See  Mundell,  1996.)  Mention  should  also  be  made  of John  Parke  
Young,  a young  Princeton  professor,  who  was  appointed  as  a  kind  of one-man  Gold  
Commission,  and showed  a considerable  recognition  of the problem  raised  by Cassel,  Rist,  
and von  Mises.  (See Young, 1925.)
’ There was ample evidence from monetary history that a restoration  of a specie standard would 
introduce  deflationary  tendencies,  as  when   Britain  put  India  on  the  silver  standard  in 
 the middle  of  the  eighteenth  century,  when  Britain  and other countries  returned  to gold  
or silver standards  after  the  Napoleonic  Wars,  and when  countries  shifted  from  silver  to 
gold  after  the breakdown  of  bimetallism  in the early 1870’s.

228                                     Economic  Sciences  1999

warning  of  the need to economize  on  the monetary use of gold in order to ward off a depression. 
 In 1928 he wrote:
The great problem  before  us is how  to  meet  the growing  scarcity  of gold which threatens the 
world both from increased demand and from diminished supply. We must solve this problem by a 
systematic restriction of the moneta- ry demand for gold. Only if we succeed in doing this can we 
hope to prevent a permanent fall of  the general  price level and a prolonged  and world-wide 
depression which would inevitably be connected with such a fall in prices.°
Rist, Mises, and Cassel proved to be right. Deflation was already in the air in the late  1920’s 
with  the fall in prices of agricultural  products and raw mate- rials. The Wall Street crash in 
1929 was another symptom, and generalized de- flation  began  in  1930. That the deflation  was 
generalized,  if uneven, can  be seen  from  the percentage  loss of wholesale  prices in various 
countries  from the  high  in  1929  to  September  1931  (the  month  that  Britain  left  the  
gold standard)   Japan,  40.5;  The  Netherlands,  38.1;  Belgium,  31.3;  Italy,  31.0;
United  States,   29.5;  United  Kingdom,   29.2;  Canada,   28.9;  France,  28.3;
Germany,  22.0.‘
The dollar price level  hit bottom  in  1932 and 1933. The highlights of the price level from 1914 
to 1934 are given in Table 1.

TABLE 1 — U.S. PRICE LEVEL, SELECTED YEARS,  1914—1933  (1930 = 100)
1914                1920                1921                178.7               113                 
 112.1
78.4                  178.7                113.0               112.1               84.1             
     76.2
Sourre:  Wholesale  Price Index,  U.S.  Bureau  of Labor  Statistics.  Adapted  from  Table  21  in 
Jastram  (1981 p. 206).


For decades economists have wrestled with the problem of what caused the deflation and depression  
of the 1930’s. The massive literature  on the subject has  brought  on  more  heat  than  light.  
One  source  of controversy  has  been whether the depression was caused by a shift of aggregate 
demand or a fall in the money supply.  Surely the answer is both! But none of the  theories — mo- 
netarist or Keynesian — would have been able to predict the fall in the money supply  or  aggregate 
 demand  in  advance.  They  were  rooted  in  short-run, closed-economy  models  which  could  not 
 pick  up  the  gold  standard  effects during  and after World War I. By contrast,  the  theory 
that the deflation  was



’ Later in the same year, Keynes had become alerted to the significance of restoration of the gold 
standard  (which  he had earlier  opposed  on grounds  that  the Federal  Reserve  might  not keep 
gold stable)  on the demand for gold and he became concerned especially about the implications of 
the 1928 French  monetary law, which in effect required gold cover for every new franc note. 
Governor Moreau  began  to convert even existing balances into gold, embarrassing  the Bank of 
England. For a thorough discussion of the French monetary law, see H. Clark Johnson  (1997) . The 
figures are from  the U.S.  Bureau of Foreign  and  Domestic  Commerce,  Commerce  Reports, 
November 9, 1931 p. 301, quoted in Jastram  (1981 p. 99).

Robert  A.  Mundell                                            229

caused  by the return  to  the gold standard was not only predictable,  but was actually, as we 
have noted above, predicted.
The gold exchange standard was already on the ropes with the onset of de- flation. It moved into 
its crisis phase with the failure, in the spring of 1931, of the Viennese  Creditanstalt,  the  
biggest  bank  in  Central  Europe —  bringing into play a chain reaction  that spread to Germany, 
where it was met by defla- tionary  monetary  policies  and  a  reimposition  of controls,  and  to 
 Britain, where,  on September  21, 1931, the pound was taken  off gold. Several  coun- tries, 
however,  had preceded Britain in going off gold: Australia, Brazil, Chile, New   Zealand,   
Paraguay,   Peru,   Uruguay,   and   Venezuela,   while   Austria, Canada,  Germany,  and  Hungary  
had  imposed  controls.  A large  number  of other countries followed Britain off gold.
Meanwhile,  the  United  States  hung  onto  the  gold  standard  for dear  life. After  making  
much  of its sensible  shift  to  a monetary  policy  that  sets  as  its goal price stability 
rather than  maintenance  of the gold standard, it reverted back to the latter at the very time it 
mattered most, in the early 1930’s.
Instead  of pumping  liquidity  into  the system,  it chose  to defend  the gold standard.  Hard on 
 the heels of the British  departure  from gold, in October 1931, the Federal Reserve raised the 
rediscount rate in two steps from 1  1/2 to  3  1/2   percent,  dragging  the  economy deeper  into 
 the  mire  of deflation and depression  and aggravating  the  banking  crisis. As we  have  seen, 
whole- sale prices fell 35 percent between  1929 and 1933.
Monetary  deflation  was transformed  into depression  by fiscal shocks. The Smoot-Hawley  tariff,  
which  led  to  retaliation  abroad,  was  the  first:  between 1929 and 1933 imports fell by 30 
percent and, significantly, exports fell even more,  by almost 40 percent.  On June 6, 1932, the 
Democratic  Congress  pas- sed, and President Herbert Hoover signed, in a fit of balanced-budget 
mania, one  of its most  ill-advised  acts — the  Revenue  Act of 1932, a bill which  pro- vided  
the  largest  percentage  tax  increase  ever  enacted  in  American  peace- time history. 
Unemployment rose to a high of 24.9 percent of the labor force in  1933, and GDP fell by 57 percent 
at current prices and 22 percent in real terms.’
The  banking  crisis  was  now  in  full  swing.  Failures  had  soared  from  an average  of about 
500 per year in  the 1920’s,  to 1,350 in  1930, 2,293 in  1931, and  1,453  in  1932.  Franklin  
D.  Roosevelt,  in  one  of his  first  actions  on  as- suming the presidency in March 1933, put 
an embargo on gold exports. After April 20, the dollar was allowed to float downward.
The deflation of the 1930’s was the mirror image of the wartime rise in the price  level  that  had 
 not  been  reversed  in  the  1920—1921  recession.  When




’ The establishment  of  the National  Industrial  Recovery Act in  1933 did  more damage when  it 
suspended  the  antitrust  laws,  encouraged  cartels  and  labor  unions,  diminished  wage  
differen- tials, limited  hours of work  to 35 hours a week, and imposed  minimum  wages,  before  
it was de- clared unconstitutional in 1935.

230                                        Economic  Sciences  1999

countries go off  the gold standard, gold falls in real value and the price levels in gold 
countries  rise. When  countries go onto  the gold standard, gold rises in real value and the price 
levels fall. The appreciation  of gold in  the  1930’s was the mirror image of the depreciation  of 
gold in World War I. The dollar price level in 1934 was the same as the dollar price level in 
1914.' The defla- tion of the 1930’s has to be seen, not as a unique “crisis of capitalism,” as the 
Marxists  were  prone  to  say,  but as a continuation  of a  pattern  that  had  ap- peared  with  
considerable  predictability  before  —  whenever  countries  shift onto  or return  to a  monetary 
 standard.  The  deflation  in  the  1930’s  has  its precedents in the 1780’s,  the 1820’s, and 
the 1870’s.
What  verdict  can  be  passed  on  this  third  of  the  century?  One  is  that  the Federal  
Reserve  System  was  fatally guilty of  inconsistency  at critical  times.  It held onto the gold 
standard  between  1914 and 1921 when gold had become unstable. It shifted over to a policy of 
price stability in the 1920’s that was suc- cessful. But it shifted  back to the gold standard at 
the worst time imaginable, when  gold  had  again  become  unstable.  The  unfortunate  fact  was  
that  the least experienced of the important central banks — the new boy on the block
— had the awesome power to make or break the system by itself.
The  European  economies  were  by  no  means  blameless  in  this  episode. They were  the  
countries  that  changed  the  status  quo  and  moved  onto  the gold  standard  without  weighing 
 the  consequences.  They failed  to  heed  the lessons of history — that a concerted movement off, 
or onto, any metallic stan- dard  brings in  its wake,  respectively,  inflation  or deflation. 
After a great war, in which inflation  has occurred in the monetary leader and gold has become 
correspondingly undervalued, a return to the gold standard is only consistent with  price  
stability  if the  price  of gold  is  increased.  Failing  that  possibility, countries would have 
fared better had they heeded Keynes’ advice to sacrifice the benefits of fixed exchange  rates 
under the gold standard and instead sta- bilize commodity prices rather than  the price of gold.
Had  the price of gold  been  raised in  the late  1920’s,  or, alternatively, had the major 
central banks pursued policies of price stability instead of adhering to the gold standard, there 
would have been no Great Depression,  no Nazi re- volution, and no World War II.









It was,  of  course,  partly  a coincidence  that  the  price  levels  in  1914 and  1933 were  
about  the same. Had the international gold standard remained in force over the period with or 
without the catastrophe  of  the world war,  the real price of gold could have changed for the same 
 reasons it changed over the history of the gold standard.  Nevertheless,  the broad influence of 
the restora- tion of the gold standard in  bringing prices back down can hardly be disputed.

Robert  A.  Mundell
231

II. POLICY MIX UNDER THE  DOLLAR STANDARD
In April 1934, after a year of flexible exchange  rates, the  United States went back to gold’ 
after a devaluation of the dollar.ⁱ’ This decreased  the gold value of the  dollar by 40.94 
percent, raising the official price of gold 69.33 percent, to  $35  an  ounce.  How  history  would 
 have  been  changed  had  President Herbert Hoover devalued  the dollar three years earlier!ⁱ’
France held onto its gold parity until 1936, when it devalued the franc. Two other farreaching  
events occurred  in  that year.  One  was  the  publication  of Keynes’ General Theory; the  other 
signing of the  Tripartite Accord among the United  States,  Britain,  and  France.  One  ushered  
in  a  new  theory  of  policy management  for  a  closed  economy;  the  other,  a  precursor  of  
the  Bretton Woods agreement, established  some rules for exchange-rate  management  in the new 
international  monetary system.
The  contradiction  between  the  two could hardly be more ironic. At a time when  Keynesian  
policies of national economic  management were becoming increasingly  accepted  by economists,  the 
world economy had  adopted  a new fixed exchange-rate  system  that was incompatible with those 
policies.
In  the  new arrangements,  which  were  ratified  at  Bretton  Woods  in 1944, countries were 
required  to establish  parities fixed in gold and maintain fixed exchange  rates  to  one  
another.  The  new  system,  however,  differed  greatly from the old gold standard. For one  
thing, the role of the United States in the


The devaluation  of the dollar and the rise in  the dollar price of gold in 1934 had  been accom- 
panied by measures eliminating the operation of the gold standard inside the United States. The 
dollar was no longer redeemable  and U.S. citizens were forbidden  to hold gold;  the dollar was 
convertible only for foreign monetary purposes;  the Federal Reserve was required to keep only a 
percentage  (initially  40  percent)  of gold  cover  behind  notes  and  liabilities;  and  the  
Supreme Court had rendered  null and void all gold clauses.
ⁱ’ The decision  to devalue was strongly influenced  by George F. Warren, Professor of Economics at 
Cornell University and one of the President's advisors. There were three possible, but related, 
benefits expected to follow from it. One was that an increase in the price of gold would raise the 
domestic  price level, starting with an increase in  the prices of imports and exports, but then 
ex- panding  throughout  the economy;  this theory, which would  be standard  today for a small 
open economy,  was  then  based  on  the  long-run  correlation  of monetary  gold  stocks  and  
the  price level. A second was that higher gold prices would result in increased gold purchases 
which would increase  the high-powered  reserve  base of the monetary system. A third was that 
devaluation,  to the  extent  that  exchange  rates  changed,  would  make  the  U.S.  products  
more  competitive  in world markets.  It  turned  out wholesale  prices did rise  by almost  30 
percent  between  1933 and 1937, then fell back about 10 percent in 1958—1940,  before doubling by 
the end of 1948.
“ One argument  against devaluation  was  that the  United  States was  the world's largest 
creditor and its claims were largely fixed in dollars;  only later was it realized  that the debts 
would  be  un- collectible.  The  avoidance  of deflation  should  have  sufficed  but in  the  
absence  of a coherent theory that gold was undervalued,  the argument might not have been 
convincing.  No one knew in advance how far down prices would proceed. An opportunity arose when 
Britain left gold, but
U.S. gold reserves were still the largest in the world. Had the Federal Reserve, however,  been 
fol- lowing a sufficiently expansionary monetary policy, gold would have flowed out and the 
situation would have become obvious.
A specious argument frequently raised against devaluation is that it is a “beggar-thy-neighbor” 
policy,  in  the sense  that it creates employment  at home at the expense  of employment  abroad. 
But this is precisely what was needed: competition  to increase employment.  If all countries deva- 
lue  competitively,  the  price  of gold could  rise  to  eliminate  the  undervaluation  and  
create  the conditions for a revival.

232                Economic  Sciences  1999

system was asymmetric. A special clause" allowed any country  the option  of fixing the price of 
gold instead of keeping the exchange rates of other mem- bers fixed.  Because  the  dollar was  the 
only currency  tied  to gold  it was  the only country in a position  to exercise  the gold option. 
There thus came into being  the  asymmetrical  arrangements  in which  the  United  States  fixed  
the price  of gold whereas  other  countries  fixed  their  currencies  to  the dollar.'" Another  
difference  of the  new  system  from  the  old  was  that  not  even  the United States was on 
anything that could be called a full gold standard. The dollar  was  no  longer in  the old sense  
“anchored”  to gold;  it was rather  that the  world  price  level,  and  therefore  the  real  
price  of gold,  was  heavily  in- fluenced  by the United States. Gold had become a passenger in 
the system.
Was  a  new  system  created  at  Bretton  Woods?  From  the  early  planning  it seemed that this 
would be the case. The British and American plans both con-
tained  provisions  for a world  currency  J   hn  Maynard  Keynes  had  his  “ban- cor,”  and  
Harry  Dexter  White  had  his  “unitas.”  But  these  forward-looking ideas were soon  buried. No 
doubt the Americans came to believe that a world
currency  would  clip  the  wings  of  the  dollar.“  There  was  not  therefore  a Bretton  Woods  
“system”  but  rather  a  Bretton  Woods  “order”  outlining  the charter of a systemⁱ’ that 
already existed.
World  War  II  brought  a repetition  of  the  monetary  imbalances  of  World War  I.  The  
devaluation  of  the  dollar  and  gathering  war  clouds  in  Europe made  the dollar a safe haven 
 and the recipient of gold to pay for war goods. The United States sterilized  the gold imports and 
imposed  price controls. It was  therefore  able  to run  deficits without  going  off gold.  
Because  gold was still “overvalued”  in this era of “dollar shortage,” interest  rates remained  
in- credibly low. By 1945, the public debt had soared to US  per cent of GDP.
At the end of the war, the U.S. price level doubled as a result of the end of price control,  the 
unleashing of pent-up demand, and the expansionary mo- netary policies of the Federal Reserve  
System  that continued  to support  the bond market. The postwar inflation  halved the real value 
of the public debt, increased tax revenues as a result of “bracket creep” in the steeply 
progressive income  tax  system  (which  rose  to  92.5  percent),  halved  the  real  value  of


" Article IV (4)-b of the Articles of Agreement  of the International  Monetary Fund. This clause 
was put in at  the last minute  to accommodate  the  United  States, which  had never,  as a 
general practice, fixed exchange rates and was not about to do so now: what a headache  it would be 
to fix all currency prices in  the New York foreign-exchange market!
"  There was, however,  still another unresolved problem. Would  Britain, France, and every other 
of the 44 members of the Fund have to intervene  in 43 exchange  markets? As the Fund got start- 
ed, its Executive  Board  had  to grope  toward a ruling  that any country that was fixing its 
curren- cy to a “convertible  currency” was deemed to be fulfilling its function under the 
Articles. In con- junction  with  the  gold  clause,  this  by-law  established  the  asymmetrical  
system  by  which  the United  States fixed  the price of gold and the rest of the world fixed, 
directly or through  a third currency,  the dollar. That this asymmetry was not widely understood 
even as late as the 1960’s can be seen from a discussion  between  myself and Sir Roy Harrod at a 
Brookings  Institution  confe- rence in 1965.
“ See Mundell  (1995) for a discussion of how the plans for a world currency came to be dropped 
from the agenda at Bretton Woods.
"  I have discussed  the distinction  between  “system” and “order” in Mundell  ( 1972) .

Robert  A.  Mundell                                              233

gold,  and  eliminated  its  overvaluation.  After  further  inflation  during  the Korean  War and 
the onset of steady “secular” inflation, gold became  under- valued.
Meanwhile, Germany and Japan, in the aftermath of their paper-money in- flations, under the 
auspices of the U.S. occupation  authorities,  had currency reforms in which 10 units of old money 
were exchanged for 1 unit of new cur- rency;  both reforms took place in 1948, with the exchange 
rate for Germany set  at  DM  4.2  =  $1,  and  for Japan  at  Y360  =  $1.  The  exchange  rates  
later proved  to  undervalue  German  and Japanese  labor  and  the  two  economies performed 
spectacularly in the postwar period, fulfilling their destiny of over- taking  Britain  and France  
as the second  and third largest economies  in  the world.
Until  the  1960’s,  U.S.  macroeconomic  policy was  based  more  on  closed- economy principles  
than on the requirements  of an international  monetary system.  Monetary and fiscal policy were 
directed at the needs of internal  ba- lance and the  balance  of  payments  was all but ignored.  
In  1949  the  United States had peaked at over 700 million  ounces of gold, more than 75 percent 
of the world's monetary gold. Gold losses began soon after, but the effect of these  sales  on  the 
 money  supply  was  sterilized  by  equivalent  purchases  of government  bonds  by  the  Federal  
Reserve  System.  The gold  losses  were  at first looked upon as a healthy redistribution of the 
world's gold reserves but toward the late 1950’s they were recognized as dangerous.
The  Federal  Reserve  System  was required  to  keep  a 25-percent  (reduced from  40 percent in  
1945)  gold cover  behind its currency and deposit liabili- ties.  If  gold  reserves  fell  below  
this  level,  interest  rates  would  have  to  be raised. If the fall in gold reserves reached  
the level of required reserves,  the United States would be forced to take account of its 
balance-of-payments con- straint like any other country. The problem of the appropriate  mix for 
mon- etary and fiscal policy came  to the foreground during  the administration of PresidentJohn  
F. Kennedy, who took office in 1961.
At  this  time  I  played  a  part  in  the  story.  Newly  arrived  in  the  Research Department  
at the International  Monetary Fund  (IMF)  in the fall of 1961, I was  asked  to  look  into  the  
theoretical  aspects  of  the  monetary-fiscal policy mix.“ The  main  problem  in  this  
post-Sputnik  era was  sluggish  growth  and subpar  employment  in  the  United  States  in  
contrast  to  Europe  and Japan (precisely  the reverse  of the situation  today), and a 
now-worrisome  balance- of-payments  deficit. Three schools of thought  had emerged.  Keynesians,  
led by Leon Keyserling,  the first Chairman  of the Council of Economic Advisers, pushed  for  easy 
 money  and  an  increase   in  government   spending.   The Chamber of Commerce  argued for fiscal 
constraint and tighter  money. The Council  of Economic  Advisers,  following  the Samuelson-Tobin 
“neoclassical synthesis,” advocated low interest rates to spur growth and a budget surplus to 
siphon off excess liquidity and prevent inflation.

“  I  had  already worked  on  models  appropriate  to solving  the  problem  in  earlier  
articles.  See especially Mundell  (1961c).

234                                        Economic  Sciences  1999

In my analysis, I showed  that none of the above  policies would work, and would lead the economy 
away from equilibrium.  The correct policy mix was to lower  taxes to spur employment,  and  
tighten  monetary  policy  to protect the balance of payments. My paper was circulated by the IMF 
to its members in November  1961 and published in INIF'StaffPapers in March  1962.
It gradually  came  to  be realized  that the policies of the Kennedy admini- stration were  not 
working:  the wrong  policy mix had produced  increasingly disequilibrating effects: a steel 
strike, a stock market crash, and stagnation. At the  end of 1962, Kennedy announced  a reversal  
of the  policy mix, with  tax cuts  to  spur  the  economy  and  interest  rates  to  protect  the  
balance  of pay- ments. Legislative delays meant that the tax cut had to wait until the summer of 
l9fi4, but its anticipation  positioned  the economy for the great expansion of the 1960’s.”
The adoption  of my policy mix helped  the United  States to achieve  rapid growth  with  
stability.  It was  not intended  to, and could  not,  solve  the  basic problem of the 
international  monetary system, which stemmed from the un- dervaluation  of gold.  Nevertheless  
the  problem  of the  U.S.  balance  of pay- ments was intricately tied up with the problem of the 
system. With very little excess gold coming into the stocks of central banks from the private 
market, and the U.S. dollar the only alternative  component of reserves,  the U.S. de- ficit was 
the principal means by which the rest of the world was supplied with additional  reserves.  If  the 
 United  States failed  to  correct  its  balance-of-pay- ments deficit, it would  no longer be 
able  to maintain  gold convertibility; on the other hand, if it corrected its deficit, the rest of 
the world would run short of reserves and bring on slower growth or, worse, deflation. The last 
scenario hinted at a repetition of the problem of the interwar period."
Two basic solutions were consistent with preserving  the system.” One solu- tion was to raise the 
price of gold. The founding fathers of the IMF had put a provision  in the IMF Articles of 
Agreement for dealing with a gold scarcity or surplus: a change in the par values of all 
currencies, which would have chang- ed  the  price  of  gold  in  terms  of all  currencies  and  
left  exchange  rates  un- changed. In the 1968 election campaign, candidate Richard M. Nixon chose 
Arthur Burns as his emissary on a secret mission" to sound out European opi-

ⁱ’ In June 1963, I was put on the IMF Article VIII Consultations  team headed by Jacques J.  Polak, 
with  a U.S.  team  that  included  Under-Secretary Robert  V.  Roosa  (who  co-chaired  the  
sessions with Polak)  and Paul Volcker,  then Director of the Treasury's Office of Financial 
Analysis.
"  The problem came  to known as the “Triffin  Dilemma," named after the disunguished  Belgian 
economist, Robert Triffin, Professor of Economics at Yale University.
"  The G-32 academic  study group. in which  I took part, outlined four possible solutions for the 
system:  (a)  return  to a gold standard;  (b)  creation  of a world  central  bank;  (c)  a new 
reserve asset to replace or supplement gold; and (d)  flexible exchange  rates.
” Burns' account of the mission, quoted in William  R. Neikirk  (1987 pp. 143—44),  is as follows:
I went on a secret mission for Richard Nixon  to test European  opinion on the issue of raising the 
price  of gold.  I went about it very discreetly.  I gave no indication  to anyone, first that I 
was Nixon's emissary and, second, that he or I had anything like that in mind. I came  to the 
conclu- sion  that  this would  be accepted  by Europeans.  I  recommended  prompt  action  right 
after  the election  [to raise the price of gold). I did that on a plane  trip with Nixon during 
the campaign. The poor man  had his mind on the speech  and  the election and then probably forgot 
about it. In any case, he did nothing about it. And that was the time to do it, right after the 
election.

Robert  A.   Mundell                                                    255

nion  on  an  increase  in  the  price  of gold.  It turned  out to  be favorable  and Burns 
recommended prompt action immediately after the election. Nothing, however, came of it.
The other option was to create a substitute for gold. This course was in fact adopted.  In  the  
late summer  of  1967, international  agreement  was reached on an amendment to the IMF articles to 
allow the creation of Special Drawing Rights    (SDRs) ,   gold-guaranteed   bookkeeping   reserves 
  made   available through  the  IMF,  with  a unit value  equal  to one  gold  dollar,  or  '/35 
of an ounce.  Somewhat  less than  SDR 10 billion were allocated  to member  coun- tries in  1970,  
1971, and  1972,  but  they proved  to  be  inadequate — too  little and too late — to meet the 
main problems of the system."'
On August 15, 1971, confronted  by requests for conversion  of dollars into gold by the United 
Kingdom and other countries,  President  Nixon  took the dollar off gold, closing  the  “gold 
window” at which  dollars were  exchanged for gold with foreign central  banks. The other countries 
 now took their cur- rencies off the dollar and a period of floating began.
But floating  made  the embryonic  plans just forming for European  monet- ary integration”  more  
difficult,  and in  December  1971, at a meeting  at the Smithsonian  Institution  in  Washington,  
DC,  finance  ministers  agreed  on  a restoration  of the  fixed-exchange-rate  system  without  
gold  convertibility. A few exchange  rates  were  changed  and  the  official  dollar  price  of 
gold  was raised,  but the act was almost purely nominal since  the United States was no longer 
committed  to buying or selling gold.
The  world  thus  moved  onto  a pure  dollar  standard,  in  which  the  major countries  fixed 
their currencies  to the dollar without a reciprocal obligation with  respect  to gold 
convertibility on  the part of the United States. But U.S. monetary  policy was  too  expansionary  
in  the  following  years  and,  after  an- other ineffective devaluation of the dollar, the system 
was allowed to break up


"  Prior  to  1968,  the  dollar  price  of gold  had  been  kept  fixed  between  margins  near  
$35  an ounce  in  the  London  gold  market;  any  excess  supply  in  the  private  market  was  
rationed  out among  the  eight members  of  the gold pool. In  the summer  of  1967,  however,  
private  demand closed  the gap and soon there was an excess demand. France dropped out of the gold 
pool and the other countries, rather  than supply the market with coveted gold reserves, let the 
gold price rise  above  the  London  limits,  giving  rise  to  the  “two-tier  system”  as  it  
was  quaintly  called. Thereafter, central banks were reluctant to sell gold at the official price 
when the market valued it at a much higher price. Gold reserves therefore  became  immobilized,  
creating a shock to the system and an explicit excess demand for gold that was not taken into 
account by the internatio- nal monetary authorities.  In  the face of this shock to the system,  
the issues of  SDRs were inade- quate  to make up the difference,  let along solve the problems of 
the system. A less timid issue — perhaps double the actual issues — might have saved the system.
“* I had introduced the issue of “Optimum Currency Areas” in Mundell  (1961a). Europe had em- 
barked on its path to monetary integration at the Hague Summit in December  1969. In the same
month, I presented to a New York audience a plan for a European  currency that was circulated in 
Brussels,  as a consequence  of which  I was invited  to consult with  the European  Commission  to 
evaluate alternative approaches to monetary union, which I did the following June. A revised ver- 
sion of my paper was presented at the Optimum Currency Areas Conference in Madrid in March 1970 and 
published in the proceedings of the conference in Harry G. Johnson and Alexander K Swoboda  (1973) 
.  My  recent  thoughts  on  the  optimum  currency  area  issue  are  expressed  in Mundell  
(1997a, b).

256                                        Economic  Sciences  1999

into generalized  floating  in  the spring of 1973. Thus ended  the dollar stan-
dard.
What lessons can  be learned from the second  third of the century?  One is that the policy mix has 
to suit the system. Another is that a gold-based  inter- national  system  cannot  survive  if 
war-related  inflation  makes  gold  under- valued and the authorities are unwilling to adjust the 
gold price and create a sufficient quantity  of gold substitutes.  A third  lesson  is that the 
superpower cannot  be disciplined  by the  requirements  of convertibility or any other  in- 
ternational  commitment  if it is at the expense  of vital  political  objectives  at home; the 
tail cannot wag the dog. A fourth  lesson  is that a fixed-exchange- rate system can work only if 
there is mutual agreement on the common  rate of inflation. Europe was willing to swallow the fact 
that the dollar was not free- ly convertible  into gold in the 1960’s, but when U.S. monetary 
policy became incompatible  with  price  stability  in  the  rest of the world  (and  in  
particular Europe),  the  costs  of the  fixed-exchange-rate system  were  perceived  to  ex- ceed 
its benefits.
A final  lesson  is that  political  events,  and  in  particular  the  Vietnam  War, soured 
relations  between  the Atlantic  partners and created a tension  in  the 1960’s  that can  only  
be  compared  with  the  pall  cast  over  the  international system by disputes over reparations 
in the 1920’s. Fixed-exchange-rate systems work better among friends than rivals or enemies.


III. INFLATION AND SUPPLY-SIDE  ECONOMICS
With  the breakdown  of  the system,  money supplies  became more  elastic, ac- commodating  not  
only inflationary  wage  developments  but  also  the  mono- polistic pricing of internationally 
traded commodities. Each time the price of oil was raised in  the 1970’s,  the Eurodollar  market 
expanded  to finance  the deficits  of  oil-importing  countries;  from  deposits  of  $223  
billion  1971  they would explode  to $2,351 billion in 1982  (International Monetary Fund,  INIT 
International Statistics Yearbook, 1988 p. 68).
Inflation  in  the  United  States  had  now  become  a  major  problem.  It  had taken  20 years,  
from  1952  to 1971,  for  U.S. wholesale  prices  to  rise  by less than 30 percent. But after 
1971, it took only 11 years for U.S. prices to rise by 157 percent! This mainly peacetime inflation 
was greater than the war-related inflations from World War II (108 percent over 1939—1948), World 
War I (121 percent over 191Ml920), the Civil War (118 percent over 1861—1864), or  the War of 1812  
(44 percent over 1811—1814).  The  greatest inflation  in U.S. his- tory since  the  War  of 
Independence  took  place  after  the  United  States  left gold in  the decade after 1971.
That inflation  in  the 1970’s was worldwide  can  be seen from  the  price in- dexes  of  the  G-7 
 countries  in  Table  2,  noting  the  index values  for 1971 in comparison with the  standard 
base of 100 in 1980. Only in Germany did con- sumer prices in the decade of the seventies fall 
short of doubling. In Italy and the  United Kingdom,  prices more  than tripled. The breakdown in 
monetary

Robert  A.  Mundell                                              2S7

discipline  was  worldwide,  engulfing  all  the  G-7  countries  and  to  an  even greater extent 
most of the rest of the world.
TABLE 2 -  CONSUMER PRICES IN G-7 COUNTRIES,  SELECTED YEARS, 1950-1998 Country                     
  1950             1971              1980             1985             1990             1998
United States             29.2               49.1               100               130.5            
158.5            197.8
Japan                           16.3               44.9               100               114.4       
     122.5            134.4
UnitedKingdom       13.4              30.3              100               141.5            188.7    
        243.6
Germany                     39.2              64.1               100                121.0           
 129.4            144.8
France                         15.6              42.1               100                157.9        
    184.2            213.7
Italy                              13.9              28.7               100                190.3    
        250.6            346.3
Canada                        28.4              47.5               100               143.0          
  177.9            203.7
Source: INIF International Financial Statistics  (International Monetary Fund, various years) .

In the United States, three back-to-back years of two-digit inflation  (1979— 1981)  created a 
crisis situation. The price of gold hit $850 an ounce in early 1980, and silver went to $50 an 
ounce. On March  14, 1980, President Jimmy Carter  announced  his new program:  an oil import  fee, 
and credit controls. The plan was a disaster and real output plummeted in the second quarter. In 
December  1980, a month after the presidential  elections,  the prime interest rate  hit  a  record 
 of 21.5  percent!  The  United  States  seemed  to  be  on  the brink of financial disaster.
Gone were  the days when, with  David Ricardo,  economists  could  think of money as a “veil.” The 
existence  of big government and progressive  income taxes guarantees nonneutrality. One route was 
through the fiscal system. With steeply  progressive  tax  rates,  rising  from  zero  to  70  
percent  at  the  federal level, and up to 85 percent counting state and local taxes, inflation was 
push- ing taxpayers into higher and higher tax brackets even at unchanged real in- comes. Taxes had 
to be paid on interest receipts even though  the bulk of the high  interest  rates  represented  
inflation  premiums.  Soaring  tax  revenues coupled with  government's  high marginal  propensity  
to spend led to an in- creasing  share of government  in the economy.  No wonder  the stock market 
hated inflation!
Supply-side  economics  began  as  a  policy  system  alternative  to  short-run Keynesian  and 
monetarist demand-side  models. It was based on a policy mix that  delivered  price  stability  
through  monetary  discipline,  and  economic stimulation  of employment  and growth  through  the  
tax and regulatory  sys- tems.  It was partly a continuation  of my work on  the policy mix in  the 
early 1960’s.'3  In the spring of 1974 I presented a paper at a conference  on global

”  In  1968, with  inflation  beginning  to  break  out, I was urging  (not with  much  success)  
tighter monetary policies combined  with a tax cut  to prevent the disinflation  from turning into 
a reces-
sion  (Mundell, 1971) . As it turned out, Congress passed, and  President  Lyndon  B. J   hnson 
sig- ned, a bill in the summer of 1968 that imposed a 10-percent “tax surcharge.” Later in the 
fall, the
task force for the new Nixon administration recommended, incorrectly in my opinion, tight mo- 
netary  and  fiscal  policies.  In Canada  during 1972—1974,  1  recommended  the  enactment  of an 
“inflation-immune tax system” which would adjust tax brackets to offset “bracket creep,” a policy 
which  the  Canadian government implemented in 1973.

238                                        Economic  Sciences  1999

inflation  in Washington,  an  excerpt  of which  was reported  (Rowland  Evans and Robert Novak, 
1981 p. 63) as follows:
While  the Ford administration was insisting that only a tax increase could fight inflation, 
Mundell argued that an immediate $10 billion reduction was es- sential  to avoid even bigger budget 
deficits fueled by “stagflation,” the lethal combination  of inflation and stagnation  inherited 
from Nixon  by Ford ...
With my arrival at Columbia University in the fall of 1974, a “club” of what later would become 
dubbed as “supply-siders” met from time to time at a Wall Street restaurant to discuss economic 
policy and particularly what to do about the rising inflation and unemployment.  The conclusion was 
that cuts in mar- ginal tax rates were needed  to create output incentives  to spur the economy, 
and  tight  money would  produce  price  stability.“  The  need for  tax cuts  and tight money 
became more urgent as inflation increased in the late 1970’s and inflation, via “bracket creep,” 
was pushing taxpayers into ever-higher income
tax  brackets.”  Within  a  short  time,  a  political  convert, JaCk F.  Kemp,  con- gressman  
from Buffalo, parlayed the ideas into a bill calling for a 30-percent
tax  cut,  most  of  which  would  be  enacted  in  a  sweeping  23-percent  tax  cut spread over 
three years, followed  by an indexing of the tax brackets for infla- tion. In the election  
campaign  of 1980, Kemp was a candidate  for the presi- dency  but  bowed  out  after  Ronald  W.  
Reagan  agreed  to  incorporate  the Kemp-Roth  bill in  his agenda for the  economy. After 
Reagan's  election,  the first phase of the new policy mix was introduced with the Economic 
Recovery Act of 1981.
Meanwhile,  the Federal Reserve,  under the chairmanship  of Paul Volcker, at long last woke up and 
tightened monetary policy. After a steep, but short, recession, the economy embarked on one of its 
longest-ever expansions at the same time that inflation was increasingly brought under control. The 
new po- licies shifted the Phillips curve downward and to the left, allowing unemploy- ment and 
inflation  to decrease at the same time.'6
There was a sequel  to the tax cut, the arms buildup, the policy of disinfla- tion, and Reagan's 
landslide reelection. The Tax Reform Act of 1986, the se- cond phase of the supply-side revolution, 
lowered the marginal tax rate in the


” See Jude Wanniski  (1978)  for his account  of supply-side  economics,  Martin Anderson  ( 1988) 
for the related account of the Reagan  Revolution,  and Robert Bartley  (1992)  for an analysis of 
the role of supply-side economics during the 1980’s.
*’  The best account of my thinking on supply-side  economics  in  the fall of  1974 is contained  
in Wanniski  (1974) .
"  The Reagan  experience also provided a test of the Mundell-Fleming model under flexible ex- 
change rates. For this model see Mundell  (1960, 1961b, 1961c, 1962, 1963, 1964)  and J.  Marcus 
Fleming  ( 1962). Prior  to its development  of this model in the early 1960’s,  there was no way 
of analyzing  the effects of monetary or fiscal stimulus in a framework  that took account of 
exchange rates, interest rates,  the  balance  of payments,  and  budget deficit. The 
Mundell-Fleming model predicted  that fiscal stimulus  combined with tight money would lead to an 
increased  budget de- ficit, an increase  in interest rates, a capital inflow, an appreciation  of 
the currency, and a worse- ning of the current account deficit and trade balance. All these 
consequences emerged after the Reagan  fiscal  stimulus  of increased  spending  and  sharp  cuts  
in  tax  rates  in  the  period  1982— 1984.

Robert  A.      funde/f                                              239

highest  tax bracket  to  28 percent,  the lowest  top marginal  rate  since  1932.” The  1982—90  
expansion  was  the  second  longest  up  to  that  time and,  along with the arms buildup, helped 
to convince the leaders of the Soviet Union  to leave Eastern Europe free to choose its own system.
Growth  continued  until  the  nine-month  downsizing  recession  of  1990— 1991, which  probably 
cost President  George  H. W.  Bush  reelection.  Expan- sion resumed in the spring of 1991 and 
continued at least until the end of the decade,  making  the combined  period  1982—2000  the 
greatest  expansion  in the history of any country.  Over the period no less than  37 million  new 
jobs were created!  The Dow-Jones average soared from below 750 in the summer of 1982 to over 
11,000 by the turn of the century.
Meanwhile,  the  withdrawal  of  the  Soviet  Union  from  Eastern  Europe —
itself, as already noted, partly due  to the success of supply-side  economics — made  unification  
of Germany possible and brought with it renewed impetus for European  monetary and political  
integration.  The  fiscal  spending  asso- ciated with  German  spending  on  its new states gave  
a jolt to the  exchange- rate  mechanism  (ERM)  of the  European  Monetary  System  (EMS)."  A few 
countries  left  the  exchange-rafe  mechanism,  and  others  opted  for  devalu- ation  within  
it.  Nevertheless,  by January  1,  1994,  the  European  Monetary
Institute came into being and, by the middle of 1998, so did its successor, the
European  Central Bank. On January 1, 1999, the euro was launched with  11 members. A new era in 
the international  monetary system was unfolding.
The  introduction  of  the  euro  redraws  the  international  monetary  land- scape. With the euro 
— upon its birth  the second most important currency in the  world — a  tri-polar  currency  world  
involving  the  dollar,  euro,  and  yen came  into  being.  The  exchange  rates among  these  
three  islands  of stability will become the most important prices in the world economy.
The creation  of the euro will doubtless  lead to its widespread  adoption  in Central  and Eastern 
 Europe  as well as the former  CFA franc zone  in Africa and along the rim of the Mediterranean. 
Expansion of the wider euro area — counting not only currencies entering with an enlargement of the 
European


” In Reagan's first term, the appreciation  of the dollar had been successful in bringing inflation 
under  control,  but,  with  growth  slowing  at  the  end  of the  period,  the  high  dollar  no  
longer served  the interest of  the  United  States. A shift in  the policy mix  toward  easier 
money in  1984 and early 1985 brought the dollar down, but not enough to satisfy the 
administration. In the fall of 1985, at a G-5  meeting at the Plaza Hotel in New York,  the five  
“SDR“ countries  organized  a more concerted depreciation,  bringing the dollar closer to 1980 
levels.
”  In  the late 1980’s, Germany had been lending, mainly to Western  Europe, about 4 percent of its 
GDP abroad with a corresponding current account surplus. The unification of Germany led to massive 
government  expenditure  in East Germany of more  than $ 100 billion a year. This fiscal shock led 
to a large bond-financed deficit and higher interest rates that reversed the capital out- flow and 
internalized  Germany's  savings,  turning the large current account surplus into a small deficit. 
To resist  inflationary  pressure,  the  Bundesbank  kept credit conditions  firm  and, faced with 
a surging demand for money,  the mark soared,  lifting with it all the other currencies  that were 
in the exchange-rate  mechanism.  The appreciation  helped to stabilize  the German  econo- my,  
but  at  the  expense  of some  of  its  partners.  The  episode  constituted  another  test  of  
the Mundell-Fleming  model,  with  similar  results  to  that  under  Reagan  except  for  the  
absence  in Germany, and the presence in the United States, or supply-side growth effects.

240                  Economic  Sciences  1999

Union, but also currencies fixed to the euro — will eventually give it a transac- tions area larger 
 than  that of the  United  States and will, inevitably,  provoke countervailing  expansion  of  
the  dollar  area  in  Latin  America  and  parts  of Asia.  Other  currency  areas  are  likely  
to  form,  adapting  to  local  needs  the example  of Europe.  But stability  for the  near future 
 will  be  best assured  by stabilization  with one of the “G-3” areas.
The  I 970’s was a decade  of inflation,  but  the  1980’s was a decade  of cor- rection,  and  the 
 1990’s  a decade  of comparative  stability.  The  experiment with  flexible  exchange  rates in  
the  1970’s  started  off as a disaster,  from  the standpoint of economic stability, but 
nevertheless, it set in motion a learning mechanism  that would  not  have  taken  place  in  its 
absence.  The  lesson  was that  inflation,  budget  deficits,  big  debts,  and  big  government  
are  all  de- trimental to public well-being and that the cost of correcting  them is so high that  
no  democratic   government  wants  to  repeat  the  experience.   Conse- quently,  virtually  all  
of  the  developed  OECD  countries  had  drastically  re- duced budget deficits and whittled  
inflation  rates down  toward  those of the pre-1914 international gold standard.
In many respects economic performance  in the 1990’s compares  well with that of the first decade 
of the century. Prudent finance then as now produced similar effects. But in two respects our modem 
arrangements -  I am trying to avoid the word  “system” — compares  unfavorably with  the earlier 
system:  the current volatility of exchange rates and the absence of a global currency.
The volatility  of exchange  rates  is  especially  disturbing  among  countries each  of which  
have  achieved,  according  to  local  definitions  and  indexes, price  stability.  The volatility 
 therefore  measures  real-exchange-rate changes and involves dysfunctional shifting  between 
domestic and international-goods industries and aggravates instability in the financial markets.
How much  flexibility  is good? If we  think of the euro as the “ghost of the mark,” could we look 
at past variations in the mark-dollar  rate as an augur of the dollar-euro rate in the future? 
Between  1971 and 1980 the mark doubled against  the dollar,  to $1 = DM1.7;  between  1980 and 
1985, it halved,  to $1 = DM  3.4;  between  1985 and  the crisis of  1992, it more  than  doubled, 
 to $1 = 1.39; and it has since fallen  to $1 = DM 1.9. The mark-dollar  rate has fluctu- ated  up 
and down  by  more  than  100  percent,  a mountain  of volatility  that would  make  the  ERM  
crisis  of 1992  seem  like  a  little  hillock.  Comparable movements of the dollar-euro  rate 
would crack Euroland apart.
Nor does looking  at the yen-dollar  rate give  us more  comfort.  The dollar has gone down from 
250 yen in 1985 to 79 yen in 1995, and then it went up to 148 yen in  1998  (with  fore-casters 
expecting  it to hit 200!) , and down  to  105 yen in early 2000.
The  twentieth  century will  not see fixed exchange  rates again  among the J3.    But it is 
entirely possible  that a new international  monetary system will emerge in the twenty-first 
century. Convergence of inflation rates has become remarkable,  better than that associated with 
parts of the Bretton  Woods era, comparable  to the gold standard itself, as Table 3 shows.
It may seem a long way off, but I believe  that given  the degree of inflation

Robert  A.  Mundell

TABLE 3 — INFLATION  RATES AMONG THE BIG THREE




1999
241
1995          1996          1997          1998          I                II               III
UnitedStates               2.8           2.9             2.3             1.6               1.7      
       2.1           2.3
Japan                         —0.1           0.1             1.7             0.6            —0.1    
      —0.3           0.0
Euroarea*                   1.8           1.5             1.8             1.0               0.8     
        1.0           1.1
Sources: IMF International Financial Statistics  (International Monetary Fund, january 2000 p. 57).
*  German  cost-of-living  index  for  1995-1998,  the  European  Monetary  Union  Index  of 
Consumer Prices for 1999.

convergence  some  sort of monetary  union  of the  three  areas would  not be impossible.  The  
same  conditions  would  result from  a three-currency fixed- exchange-rate  system with agreement 
over a common inflation rate and a fair distribution   of   seignior-age.   If   such   a  
fixed-exchange-rate  arrangement among countries that had converged is conceivable, it would not be 
such a far step toward a reformed international monetary system with a world money of the kind 
initially proposed back in the days of Bretton Woods.
To conclude this section, what lessons can we take from the last third of the twentieth  century?  
One  is that flexible  exchange  rates,  at least initially,  did not provide the same discipline 
as fixed rates. A second is that the costs of in- flation are much higher in a world with 
progressive income tax rates. A third is  that  the  need  for,  and  means  of,  attaining  
monetary  stability  can  be learned. A fourth is that the policy mix can shift the Phillips curve.
Experience  breeds  its  own  reaction:  Plato  the  inflationist  gave  birth  to Aristotle,  the  
hardmoney  man.  The  reaction  in  the  1980’s  gave  a  boost  to central-bank  independence.  
Governments  forced  into  the  Maastricht  mold had to cut back on spending growth as well as 
deficits. Supply-side economics pointed to one of the mechanisms for strapping down ministers of 
finance.
One lesson, however,  has yet to be learned. Flexible exchange rates are an unnecessary  evil in a 
world where each country has achieved price stability.

IV. CONCLUSIONS
It is  time  to wrap  up the century  in  some  conclusions.  A first conclusion  is that the 
international  monetary system depends on the power configuration of the countries that make it up. 
Bismarck once said that the most important fact of the nineteenth century was that England and 
America spoke the same language. Along the same lines, the most important fact of the twentieth 
cen- tury has  been  the rise  of  the United  States as a superpower.  Despite  the  in- credible 
rise in gold production, Gresham's Law" came into play and the dol- lar elbowed out gold as the 
principal international  money.
The first third of twentieth-century economics was dominated  by the con-

"   Gresham's  Law  was  well  known   by  the  ancient  Greeks  and   even   used   humorously   
in Aristophanes'  play, The frogs. For a recent analysis see Mundell  (1998).

242                                      Economic  Sciences  1999

frontation  of the Federal  Reserve  System  with  the gold  standard.  The gold standard broke 
down in World War I and its restoration in the 1920’s created the deflation  of the 1930’s. 
Economists blamed  the gold standard instead of their  mishandling  of it and  turned  away from  
international  automaticity  to national management.  The Great Depression  itself let to 
totalitarianism and World War II.
The second  third  of  the  twentieth  century was dominated  by the  contra- diction between 
national macroeconomic management and the new interna- tional monetary system. In  the new system, 
the United States fixed  the price of gold  and  the other  major  countries fixed  their  
currencies  to the conver- tible dollar. But national macroeconomic management  precluded  the 
opera- tion of the international adjustment mechanism  and the system broke down in  the early 
1970’s when  the  United States stopped  fixing  the price  of gold and the other countries stopped 
fixing the dollar.
The last third  of  the twentieth  century started off with  the destruction  of the international  
monetary system and  the vacuum  sent officials and acade- mics into a search for “structure.” In 
the 1970’s the clarion call was for a “new international monetary order” and in the 1990’s a “new 
international mone- tary  architecture.”  The  old  system  was  one  way  of  handling  the  
inflation problem multilaterally. Flexibility left each country to control inflation on its own.  
Inflation  was  the  initial  result,  but  a  learning  mechanism  gradually educated a generation 
of monetary officials on the advantages of stability and by the end of the century fiscal prudence 
and inflation control had again be- come the watchword in all the rich and many of the poor 
countries.
Today,  the dollar,  the euro, and yen  have established  three islands of mo- netary  stability,  
which  is  a great  improvement  over  the  1970’s  and  1980’s. There are, however, two pieces of 
unfinished business. The most important is the  dysfunctional  volatility  of  exchange  rates  
that  could  sour  international relations in  time of crisis. The other is the absence  of an  
international  cur- rency.
The century closes with an international  monetary system inferior  to that with which it began, 
but much improved from the situation  that existed only two-and-a-half decades ago. It remains to 
be seen where leadership will come from and whether a restoration  of the international  monetary 
system will be compatible with the power configuration of the world economy. It would cer- tainly 
make a contribution  to world harmony.


REFERENCES
Anderson, Martin. Resolution. New York: Harcourt Brace J•    novich,  1988. Bartley, Robert. The 
seuen fat  years. New York: Free Press, 1992.
Cassel, Gustay.  The restoration of gold as a universal monetary  standard  (1925).
—. Postwar monetary  stabilization. New York: Columbia University Press, 1928.
Evans, Rowland and Novak, Robert.  TO fi'eogoii resolution.  New York: E. P. Dutton, 1981. Fleming. 
J-  Marcus.  ‘Domestic  Financial  Policies  Under  Fixed  and  Floating  Exchange
Rates." INIF Staff Papers, November 1962,  9(3), pp. 369—79.

Robert  A.   Mundell                                                       243

International   Monetary   Fund.   IMF   international    statistical    yearbook.   Washington,   
DC: International  Monetary Fund, 1988.
-.   INIT international  financial statistics. Washington,  DC: International  Monetary Fund, vari- 
ous years.
Jastrani,  Roy. Silver: The restless  metal. New York: Wiley, 1981.
J         on, H.  Clark.  Gold, France,  and  the Great Depression,  1919-1932.  New Haven, CT: 
Yale University Press, 1997.
J   hnson,  Harry  G.   and  Swoboda,  Alexander  K,    eds.  The  economics  of  common  
currencies.
London: George Allen & Unwin  Ltd., 1973, pp. 114—32.
Keynes. J         Maynard.  A tract on monetary  reform.  London: Macmillan,  1923.
Mundell,  R. 1     ‘The  Monetary  Dynamics  of International  Adjustment  Under  Fixed  and
Flexible Exchange Rates.” Quarterly Journal o/Ecmioinics,  May 1960,  84(2) , pp. 227—57.
—.  “A Theory  of Optimum  Currency  Areas.”  American Economic     e  im,  September  1961a, 
II(4), pp. 657—65; reprinted in Mundell  (1968).
—.  “Flexible  Exchange  Rates  and  Employment  Policy.”  Canadian Journal  of Economics  and 
Political Serene:e,  November  1961b,  27(4), pp. 509—17;  reprinted in Mundell  (1968) .
—.  ‘the International  Disequilibrium System."  K  klos,  1961c,  14(2) , pp. 154-72; reprinted in 
Mundell  (1968).
—.  ‘the Appropriate  Use of Monetary and Fiscal Policy for Internal and External Stability."
IIvIF Staff Papas, March  1962,  9(1), pp. 70—79.
—.  “Capital  Mobility  and  Stabilization  Policy  Under  Fixed  and Flexible  Exchange  Rates.”
Canadian Journal of Economics  and Political Science,  November  1963, 39(4) , pp. 475—85; re- 
printed in R. Caves and H  J   hnson, eds., Readings  in international economics.  Burr Ridge, IL: 
Richard D. Irwin, Inc. (for the American Economic Association),  1967, pp. 487—99.
—.  “A Reply:  Capital  Mobility  and Size.”  Canadian Journal  of Economics  and Political  
Science,
August 1964, TO(3), pp. 421—431;  reprinted  in Mundell  (1968).
—    ‘the   Dollar   and   the   Policy  Mix:   1971.”  Essays   to  International   Finance,   
Princeton University,  May 1971, (8X  , pp. 1—28.
—.  The      Future  of the  International  Financial  System,"  in  A. Acheson, J.  Chant,  and  
M. Prachowny,  eds.,  Bretton  Woods  revisited.  Toronto:  University  of Toronto  Press,  1972,  
pp. 91—104.
—   ‘The  International  Monetary  System:  The  Missing  Factor.” /ournof  of  Potic f  Modeling,
October 1995,  J 7(5), pp. 479—92.
—.  “Jacques Rueff and the International  Monetary System,” in  Actualité de la §ensee 8e Jacques 
Rueff. Proceedings  of a colloquium  held on the centenary of the birth ofJacques Rueff, Paris, 
November 7, 1996.
-.   “Updating  the  Agenda  for  Monetary  Reform,”  in  Mario  I.  Blejer,  Jacob  A.  Frankel, 
Leonardo  Leiderman,  Assaf Razin,  (and  in  cooperation  with  David  M.  Cheney) ,  eds.,
tiinuin currency areas. Washington,  DC: International  Monetary Fund, 1997a.
-.   The iiiternotiotinf  monetarysystem in  the 21a' century: Would gold make a comeback.* 
Latrobe, PA: Center for Economic Policy Studies, St. Vincent College, 1997b.
—  “Uses and Abuses of Gresham's Law in the History of Money.” Zogre6Journof  ofEconomics,
1998, 2(2), pp. S—38.
Neikirk, William R.  Volcker: Portrait  of the moneyman. New York: Congdon & Weed, 1987.
Reid, Whitelaw.  The greatest fact ia modern fiistor). New York: Crowell,  1907.
Wanniski. J   ñe. “It's Time to Cut Taxes.” fluff Street Journal, December  11, 1974.
-.   The way  the world wortis. New York: Basic Books, 1978.
Youna.  J         Parke.   European  currency   and  finance.  Washington,   DC:  U.S.  Government 
Printing Office, 1925.
