85

APPLICATIONS  OF OPTION-PRICING THEORY: TWENTY-FIVE  YEARS LATER*

Nobel Lecture, December 9, 1997 by
ROBERT  C.   MERTON

Graduate  School  of  Business  Administration,  Harvard  University,  Boston, MA  02163,  USA  and 
 Long-Term   Capital   Management,   L.P.,  Greenwich, CT 06831, USA


INTRODUCTION'
The  news  from  Stockholm   that  the  prize  in  economic  sciences  had  been given  for  
option-pricing  theory  provided  unique  and  signal  recognition  to the  rapidly  advancing,  
but  still  relatively  new  discipline,  within  economics which  relates mathematical  finance  
theory and finance practice. The special sphere of finance within economics is the study of 
allocation and deployment of economic  resources,  both  spatially  and  across  time,  in  an  
uncertain  en- vironment. To capture the influence and interaction  of time and uncertainty 
effectively   requires   sophisticated   mathematical   and  computational   tools. Indeed, 
mathematical  models of modern finance contain some truly elegant applications  of probability and 
optimization  theory. These applications  chal- lenge the most powerful computational  
technologies.  But, of course, all that is elegant  and challenging  in  science  need  not also  
be practical;  and surely, not all  that  is practical  in  science  is elegant  and challenging.  
Here we  have both.  In  the  time  since  publication  of  our early work on  the  option-pricing 
model,  the  mathematically  complex  models  of  finance  theory  have  had  a direct and 
wide-ranging  influence  on finance practice. This conjoining  of in- trinsic  intellectual  
interest with extrinsic  application  is central  to research  in modern finance.
It was not always thus. The origins of much of the mathematics in modern finance can  be traced to 
Louis BacheJier's  1900 dissertation  on the theory of speculation,  framed as an option-pricing 
problem.  This work marks the twin births  of both  the  continuous-time  mathematics  of 
stochastic  processes  and the  continuous-time  economics   of  derivative-security  pricing.   
Kiyoshi   Ito ( 1987)  was greatly influenced  by Bachelier's work in  his development  in  the


*  I am grateful  to Robert K. Merton,  Lisa Meulbroek,  and Myron  Scholes for  their  helpful  
sug- gestions on this lecture and for so much more. Over the past thirty years, I have come to owe 
an incalculable debt to Paul A. Samuelson, my teacher, mentor, colleague, co-researcher, and 
friend. Try as I have  (cf. Merton,  1983, 1992) , I cannot find the words  to pay sufficient  
tribute to him. I dedicate  this  lecture  to  Paul  and  to  the  memory  of  Fischer  Black.  
Copyright  O  Nobel  Foun- dation.
' This section draws on Merton  (1994, 1995, 1997b) .

86

1940s and early 1950s of the stochastic  calculus,  later to become an essential mathematical  tool 
 in  finance.  Paul  Samuelson’s  theory  of  rational  warrant pricing,  published  in  1965, was 
also  motivated  by the  same  piece.  However, Bachelier's  important work was largely lost to 
financial  economists  for more than  a  half  century.  During  most  of  that  period,  
mathematically  complex models  with  a strong  influence  on  practice  were  not at all  the  
hallmarks  of finance theory. Before  the pioneering work of Markowitz, Modigliani,  Miller, 
Sharpe,  Lintner,  Fama, and Samuelson  in  the late  1950s and  1960s,  finance theory  was  
little  more  than  a collection  of  anecdotes,  rules  of  thumb,  and shuffling  of accounting  
data.  It was  not until  the end of  the  1960s and early 1970s  that models of finance  in 
academe  become considerably  more sophis- ticated,  involving   both  the  intertemporal   and  
uncertainty  dimensions   of valuation  and optimal  decision-making. The  new models  of dynamic  
portfo- lio theory,  intertemporal  capital asset pricing, and derivative-security pricing employed 
 stochastic  differential  and  integral  equations,  stochastic  dynamic programming,  and  
partial  differential  equations.  These  mathematical  tools were  a quantum  level  more  complex 
 than  had  been  used  in  finance  before and they are still the core  tools employed  today.
The most influential  development  in  terms of impact on  finance  practice was the Black-Scholes 
model for option pricing. Yet paradoxically, the mathe- matical model was developed entirely in 
theory, with essentially no reference to empirical option-pricing data as motivation for its 
formulation. Publication of  the  model  brought  the  field  to  almost  immediate  closure  on  
the  funda- mentals  of option-pricing theory. At the same  time, it provided  a launching pad for 
refinements of the theory, extensions  to derivative-security pricing in general, and a wide range 
of other applications,  some completely outside the realm  of  finance.  The  Chicago  Board  
Options  Exchange  (CBOE) ,  the  first public  options  exchange,  began  trading  in April  1973, 
and  by 1975,  traders on the CBOE were using the model to both price and hedge their option po- 
sitions. It was so widely used that, in those pre-personal-computer days, Texas Instruments  sold  
a  handheld  calculator  specially  programmed  to  produce Black-Scholes option prices and hedge 
ratios. That rapid adoption was all the more  impressive,  as the mathematics  used in the model 
were  not part of  the standard  mathematical   training  of  either  academic   economists  or  
practi- tioner  traders.
Academic finance research of the 1960s including capital asset pricing, per- formance and risk 
measurement, and the creation of the first large-scale data- bases for security prices essential 
for serious empirical work have certainly in- fluenced  subsequent  finance  practice.  Still  the  
speed  of adoption  and  the intensity of  that influence was not comparable  to the influence  of 
the option model.  There  are surely several  possible  explanations  for the different  rates of 
adoption in the 1960s and the 1970s. My hypothesis is that manifest “need" determined  that  
difference.  In  the  1960s,  especially  in  the  United  States, financial  markets  exhibited  
unusually  low  volatility:  the  stock  market  rose steadily,  interest  rates were  relatively  
stable,  and  exchange  rates were  fixed. Such  a  market  environment  provided  investors  and  
financial-service  firms

Robert  C.  Merton                                                  87

with little incentive  to adopt new financial  technology,  especially technology designed to help 
manage risk. However, the 1970s experienced several events that caused  both structural changes and 
large increases in volatility. Among the  more  important  events were:  the  shift from  fixed  to 
floating  exchange rates with  the  fall  of  Bretton  Woods  and  the  devaluation  of  the  
dollar;  the world  oil-price  shock with  the  creation  of OPEC;  double-digit  inflation  and 
interest rates in the United States; and the extraordinary  real-return  decline in  the  U.S.  
stock  market  from  a  peak  of  around  1050  on  the  Dow Jones Industrial Average in the 
beginning of 1973 to about 580 at the end of 1974. As a result,  the increased demand for managing 
risks in a volatile and struc- turally different economic  environment  contributed  to the major 
success of the derivative-security exchanges created in the 1970s to trade listed options on 
stocks, futures on  major currencies, and futures on fixed-income  instru- ments. This success in 
turn increased  the speed of adoption for quantitative financial models to help value options and 
assess risk exposures.
The influence  of option-pricing theory on finance  practice  has not been limited  to financial 
options traded in markets or even to derivative securities generally.  As  we  shall  see,  the  
underlying  conceptual  framework  originally used  to derive  the option-pricing formula can be 
used  to price and evaluate the  risk  in  a  wide  array  of  applications,  both  financial  and  
non-financial. Option-pricing technology  has played a fundamental  role in supporting  the 
creation  of  new  financial  products  and  markets  around  the  globe.  In  the present  and  in 
 the impending  future,  that  role will continue  expanding  to support  the design  of entirely 
new financial institutions, decision-making by senior  management,  and  the formulation  of  
public  policy  on  the  financial system. To underscore  that point, I begin with a few remarks 
about financial innovation  of the past, this adumbration  to be followed in later sections with a 
detailed listing of applications of the options technology that include some observations on the 
directions of future changes in financial services.
New financial  product  and  market designs, improved  computer  and  tele- communications 
technology  and  advances  in  the  theory  of  finance  during the past quarter-century have led 
to dramatic and rapid changes in the struc- ture of global financial markets and institutions. The 
scientific breakthroughs in financial modeling in this period both shaped and were shaped by the 
ex- traordinary flow of financial innovation which coincided with those changes. Thus, the 
publication  of the option-pricing model in 1973 surely helped  the development  and growth  of  
the listed  options and over-the-counter  (OTC) derivatives markets. But, the extraordinary growth 
and  success of those mark- ets just as surely stimulated  further  development  and  research  
focus or   the derivative-security pricing models. To see  this in  perspective,  consider some of 
the innovative changes in market structure and scale of the global financial system since 1973. 
There occurred the aforementioned fall of Bretton Woods leading to floating-exchange rates for 
currencies; the development of the na- tional mortgage market in the United States which in  turn 
restructured  that entire  industry;  passage  of  the  Employee  Retirement  Income  Security  Act 
(ERISA)  in 1974 with the subsequent development of the U.S. pension-fund

88                                      Economic  Sciences  1997

industry;  the first money-market fund with check writing that also took place in  1974; and  the 
explosive  growth  in  mutual  fund assets from $48 billion  25 years ago to $4.3  trillion  today  
(a ninety-fold  increase), with one institution, Fidelity Investments,  accounting  for some $500 
billion  by itself. In  this same period, average daily trading volume  on  the New York Stock 
Exchange  grew from  12 million  shares  to more  than  300 million.  Even  more  dramatic  were 
the changes  in Europe  and in Asia.  The cumulative  impact  has significantly affected all of 
uwas users, producers, or overseers of the financial system.
Nowhere has this been more the case than in the development,  refinement and broad-based  
implementation of contracting  technology.  Derivative  secu- rities  such  as futures,  options,  
swaps  and  other  contractual  agreements—the underlying  substantive  instruments for which our 
model was developed—pro- vide  a prime  example.  Innovations  in  financial-contracting technology 
 have improved  efficiency  by  expanding  opportunities  for  risk  sharing,  lowering 
transactions  costs and reducing information  and agency costs. The numbers reported for the global 
use of derivative securities are staggering(the figure of
$70  trillion  appeared  more  than  once  in  the  news  stories  surrounding  the award of  the 
Prize and there are a number of world banking  institutions with reported  multi-trillion  dollar,  
off-balance-sheet  derivative  positions) .  How- ever, since these are notional amounts  (and 
often  involve  double-counting) , they are meaningless for assessing either the importance or the 
risk-exposure to derivative  securities.' Nevertheless,  it is enough  to say here  that,  properly 
measured,  derivatives  are  ubiquitous  throughout  the world  financial  system and that they are 
used widely by non-financial firms and sovereigns as well as by institutions in virtually every 
part of their financing and risk-managing ac- tivities. Some observers see the extraordinary growth 
in the use of derivatives as fad-like, but a more likely explanation  is the vast saving in 
transactions costs derived from  their use. The cost of implementing  financial  strategies  for 
in- stitutions using derivatives can be one-tenth  to one-twentieth  of the cost of ex- ecuting  
them  in  the  underlying  cash-market  securities.’  The  significance  of reducing  spread  costs 
 in  financing  can  be  quite  dramatic  for  corporations and  for  sovereigns:  for  instance,  
not  long  ago,  a  1  percent  (i.e.,  100-basis- point)  reduction  in debt-spread  cost on 
Italian government debt would have reduced the deficit by an amount equal to 1.25 percent of the 
gross domestic product of Italy.
Further  improved  technology,  together with  growing  breadth  and  experi- ence  in  the  
applications  of  derivatives,  should  continue  to  reduce  transac- tions costs as both users 
and producers of derivatives  move along the learning curve.  Like  retail  depositors  with  
automatic-teller machines  in  banks,  initial


Notional amounts typically represent either the total value of the underlying asset on which pay- 
ments on  the derivative is determined  (e.g interest-rate  swap contracts)  or the exercise  price 
on an  option.  The  value  of  the  derivative  contract  itself  is  often  a  small  fraction  
of  its  notional amount.
See André F. Perold  (1992)  for a case study illustrating  the savings in transactions costs,  
taxes, and  custodial  fees from  using derivatives  instead  of  the  cash  market.  Myron  S. 
Scholes  (1976) provides an early analysis of the effect of taxes on option prices.

Robert  C.  Merton                                               89

resistance  by institutional  clients to contractual agreements can be high, but once customers  
use  them  they tend  not  to return  to  the  traditional  alterna- tives for implementing 
financial strategies.
A central process in  the past two decades has been  the remarkable  rate of globalization  of  the 
financial system. Even  today, inspection  of the  diverse fi- nancial systems of individual 
nation-states would lead one  to question how ef- fective  integration  across geopolitical  
borders  could  have  realistically  taken place since those systems are  rarely compatible in 
institutional forms, regula- tions, laws, tax structures, and business practices. Still, 
significant integration did  take  place. This was  made  possible  in  large  part  by derivative  
securities functioning as “adapters”. In general, the flexibility created by the  widespread use of 
contractual agreements, other derivatives, and  specialized institutional designs provides an 
offset to dysfunctional  institutional  rigidities.’ More spe- cifically,  derivative-security 
contracting  technologies  provide efficient  means for creating cross-border  interfaces among 
otherwise incompatible  domestic systems, without requiring widespread  or radical changes within 
each system. For  that  reason, implementation of  derivative-security technology  and  mar- kets 
within smaller and  emerging-market countries may help form important gateways of access to world 
capital markets and  global risk-sharing. Such dev- elopments  and  changes  are  not  limited  
only  to  the  emerging-market coun- tries with  their new financial systems. Derivatives and  
other contracting  tech- nologies are likely to play a significant role in the financial 
engineering of the major  transitions required for European  Monetary Union and for the major 
restructuring of financial institutions in Japan.
With  this  introduction  as  background,  I  turn  now  to  the  key  conceptual and  mathematical 
 framework  underlying  the  option-pricing  model  and  its subsequent applications.

GENERAL DERIVATION  OF DERIVATIVE-SECURITY PRICING
I understand  that it is customary in these lectures for the Laureates to review the  background  
and  the  process  leading  up  to  their  discoveries.  Happily, there is no  need  to do  so here 
since  that has been  done elsewhere  in  Black (1989),  Bernstein  (1992,  Ch.II),  Merton  and  
Scholes  (1995),  and  Scholes (1998). Instead, I briefly summarize.  My principal contribution  to 
the  Black- Scholes option-pricing theory was to show that the dynamic  trading strategy prescribed 
 by  Black  and   Scholes  to  offset  the  risk  exposure  of  an  option would  provide a perfect 
 hedge in  the  limit of continuous  trading. That is, if one  could trade continuously without 
cost, then following their dynamic trad- ing strategy using the underlying traded asset and the  
riskless asset would ex- actly  replicate  the  payoffs  on  the  option.  Thus,  in  a  
continuous-trading fi-

Scholes and Mark A. Wolfson  (1992)  develop the principles of security and institutional  design 
along  these  lines.  See  also  Perold  (1992)  and  Merton  (1993,  1995) .  Inspection  of the  
weekly International Financing Rents will find the widespread  and varied applications  of 
financial  engi- neering,  derivatives,  special-purpose  vehicles  and  securities  for 
private-sector and sovereign  fi- nancing in every part of the world.

90                                    Economic  Sciences  199'7

nancial environment,  the option price must satisfy the  Black-Scholes formula or else  there would 
 be an opportunity for arbitrage  profits. To demonstrate this limit-case  result, I applied  the  
tools developed in my earlier work  (1969; 1971)  on  the  continuous-time  theory of  portfolio  
selection.  My 1973 paper also  extended  the  applicability  of  the  Black-Scholes  model  to  
allow for  sto- chastic interest rates on  the riskless asset, dividend payments on  the  underly- 
ing asset, a changing  exercise  price, American-type  early-exercise  of  the  op- tion, and other 
“exotic” features such as the “down-and-out” provision on  the option.  I  am  also  responsible  
for  naming  the  model,  “the  Black-Scholes Option-Pricing Model.
The  derivations  of  the  pricing formula  in  both  of  our  1973 papers  make the following 
assumptions:
I)     “Frictionless” and  “continuous”  markets:  there  are  no  transactions  costs  or 
differential  taxes. Markets are open all the  time and  trading  takes place continuously.  
Borrowing  and  short-selling  are  allowed  without  restric- tion. The  borrowing and  lending 
rates are equal.
II)    Underlying  asset-price  dynamics:  let   Y= V(t) denote  the  price at  time  / of a 
limited-liability asset, such as a share of stock. The  posited dynamics for the instantaneous  
returns can be described  by an  IU-type stochastic dif- ferential equation with continuous sample 
paths given by


where:  n      instantaneous  expected  rate  of  return  on  the  security;  ‹         in- 
stantaneous  variance  rate, which is assumed  to depend, at most, on V(t)  and t  (i.e.,  w’ = 
O2(V,t)) ;  dZ is a Wiener process; and D1        dividend payment flow rate. With limited 
liability, to avoid arbitrage,  V(I)  = 0 for all I > f* if  V(f*)  = 0. Hence  D1  must  satisfy  
D1(0, i)  =  0.  Other  than  a  technical  requirement  of bounded variation,  a  can  follow a 
quite general  stochastic  process,  depend-
ent on  V, other  security  prices,  or state variables.  In  particular,  the assumed dynamics 
permit a mean-reverting process for the underlying asset's returns.
III)  Default-free bond-price dynamics: bond returns are assumed  to be described by Ito  
stochastic processes with continuous sample paths. In  the original Black and  Scholes formulation 
and for exposition convenience here, it is assumed  that the riskless instantaneous interest rate, 
r(t)  —— r, is a constant over time.
IV)   Investor  preferences  and  expectations:  investor  preferences  are  assumed  to prefer 
more to less. All investors are assumed  to agree on the function  w’

My 1970 working paper was the first to use the “Black-Scholes” label for their model (cf. Merton 
1992, p. 579) . This same paper was given at the July 1970 Wells Fargo Capital Market Conference, 
since made “famous”  (or notorious)  by Bernstein  (1992, p. 223)  as the one at which I “...incon- 
veniently overslept. ..” the morning session and missed the Black and Scholes presentation. The 
second instance naming their model was in  the 1971 working-paper  version  of Merton  (1973a) . 
Samuelson  (1972)  is the first published usage:  both in the main text and in my appendix  to that 
paper which  derives  the  model  and refers  to it as  the  “Black-Scholes formula.” The formula  
is cited  in  Roger J.  Leonard  (1971)  and  Carliss  Baldwin  (1972) ,  the  earliest  theses  to 
 apply  the model. Somewhat ironically, all these references to the “Black-Scholes model” appear 
before the actual publication of either Black and Scholes  (1972)  or (1973) .

Robert  C.  Merton                                                91

and  on the Itfi process characterization for the return dynamics. It is not assumed  that they 
agree on  the expected rate of return, a.
V)    Functional  dependence  of  the option-pricing formula:  the  option  price  is as- sumed  to 
 be  a  twice-continuously  differentiable  function  of  the  asset price,  V, default-free bond 
prices, and  time.
In the particular case of a nondividend-paying asset (Dj    —— 0) and  a constant variance rate, 
cr’, these assumptions lead to the  Black-Scholes  option-pricing formula for a European-type  call 
option with exercise price L and  expiration date T, written as

(1)            C(V, t)  ——   V N(d) - L exp(-r[T-t]) N(d-crTO—   )

where  d —— (  In fV/L] + {r + O’/2][T-t])  / O           -  t and N()   is the cumulative densi- 
function for the standard  normal distribution.
Subsequent research in the field proceeded along three dimensions: appli- cations of the technology 
 to other than financial  options  (which  is discussed in  the  next section) ;  empirical  
testing  of  the  pricing  formula,  which  began with  a  study  using  over-the-counter data  
from  a  dealer's  book  obtained  by Black  and  Scholes  (1972) ;  attempts  to weaken  the  
assumptions  used  in  the derivation, and thereby to strengthen  the foundation of the 
applications dev- eloped from  this research. The balance of this section addresses issues of the 
latter dimension.
Early concerns raised about the model's theoretical foundation  came from Long  (1974)  and Smith  
(1976) , who questioned Assumption  V  namely,  how does one know that the option prices do not 
depend on other variables  than the ones assumed  (for instance,  the price of beer), and why 
should the pric- ing  function   be   twice-continuously  differentiable?  These   concerns   were 
resolved  in  an  alternative  derivation  in  Merton   (1977b)  which  shows  that Assumption  U 
is a derived consequence,  not an assumption,  of the analysis.‘ A broader, and still open, 
research issue is the robustness of the pricing for- mula in the absence of a dynamic portfolio 
strategy that exactly replicates the payoffs  to  the  option  security.  Obviously,  the  
conclusion  on  that  issue  de- pends on why perfect replication is not feasible as well as on the 
magnitude of the  imperfection.  Continuous  trading  is,  of  course,  only  an  idealized  pro- 
spect,   not  literally  obtainable;   therefore,  with   discrete   trading  intervals, 
replication   is  at  best  only  approximate.   Subsequent  simulation  work  has shown  that 
within the actual trading intervals available and the volatility levels of speculative  prices,  
the  error in  replication  is manageable,  provided,  how- ever,  that  the  other  assumptions  
about  the  underlying  process  obtain.  Cox

As  another  instance  of  early  questioning  of  the  core  model,  a  paper  I  refereed  argued 
 that Black-Scholes  must  be  fundamentally  flawed  because  a  different  valuation  formula  is 
derived from  the  replication  argument  if  the  R.  L. Stratonovich  (1968)  stochastic  
calculus  is used for modeling instead of the Itfi calculus. My report showed that while the 
paper's mathematics were correct, its economics were not: A Stratonovich-type formulation of the 
underlying price process implies that traders have a partial knowledge about future asset prices 
that the non-anticipating character of the Itñ process does not. The “paradox" is thus resolved 
because the assumed infor- mation sets are essentially different and hence, so should the pricing 
formulas.

92                                          Economic  Sciences  1997

and Ross (1976)  and Merton  (1976a, b) relax the continuous sample-path  as- sumption  and analyze 
 option  pricing using a mixture  ofjump and diffusion processes to capture  the prospect of 
non-local movements  in  the underlying asset's return  process.’ Without  a continuous  sample  
path, replication  is not possible  and that rules out a strict no-arbitrage  derivation.  Instead, 
 the deri- vation  of  the  option-pricing  model  is completed  by using  equilibrium  asset 
pricing models such  as the Intertemporal  CAPM  [Merton  (1973b) ]  and the Arbitrage  Pricing 
Theory  [Ross  (1976a) ].' This approach  relates  back to the original way in which Black and 
Scholes derived their model using the classic Sharpe-Lintner CAPM.9  There has developed a 
considerable  literature on the case of imperfect replication  (Cf. Bertsimas, Kogan, and Lo [1997] 
, Breeden [19841,  Davis  [199+l    Figlewski  [198  l   Follmer  and  Sondermann   [1986] , and 
Romano and Touzi  [1997] ) .
On this occasion, I re-examine the imperfect-replication problem for a de- rivative  security  
linked  to an  underlying  asset  that is  not continuously  avail- able for  trading  in an 
environment  in which  some  assets are  tradable  at any time.  As  is  discussed  in  the  
section  to  follow,  non-tradability  is  the  circum- stance for several important classes of 
applications that have evolved over the last  quarter  century,  which  include  among  others,  
the  pricing  of  financial guarantees  such as deposit and pension  insurance and the valuation  
of non- financial  or  “real” options.  Since  the Black-Scholes  model was derived  by as- suming 
that the underlying asset is continuously traded, questions have been raised  about whether  the  
pricing formula  can  be  properly  applied  in  those applications.   The  derivation  follows  
along  the  lines  presented  in  Merton (1977b, 1997b)  for the perfect-replication case.
A  derivative  securifl  has  contractually  determined  payouts  that  can  be  de- scribed by 
functions  of observable  asset prices and time. These payout func- tions define the derivative. We 
express the terms as follows:
Let  W(i)  = price of a derivative security at time  t.

if        V(r)  > V(t)  for 0 ñ t <  T, then  W(I) =  f  V(t), I)
(2)        If       Y(i)  < V(t)  for 0 G t <  T, then W(I) =  g[Vat), t If     t -— T,   then WHT) 
-— h VAT)]

’ Since  a  discontinuous  sample-path  price  process  for  the  underlying  asset  rules  out  
perfect hedging even with continuous trading but a continuou+sample-path process with stochastic 
vo- latility does not,  there  is considerable  interest in  testing which  process fits the data 
better. See Eric Rosenfeld  (1980) , an early developer of such tests and James B. Wiggins  (1987) 
.
‘ The important  Douglas T. Breeder  (1979)  Consumption-based  Capital  Asset  Pricing  Model, 
which was not published at the time of these papers, can also be used to complete those models. See 
Black  (1989) and Scholes (1998) . Fischer Black always maintained with me that the CAPM- version 
of the option-model derivation was more robust because continuous  trading is not feasi- ble  and  
there  are  transactions  costs.  As  noted  in  Merton  (1973a,  p.  116) ,  the  discrete-time 
Samuelson-Merton  (1969)  model also gives the Balck-Scholes formula under special conditions.

2toéert  C. 3f     n                                            93

For 0 S  I S      the derivative security receives a payment flow rate specified by D$   V,I). The 
terms as described in (2) are to be interpreted as follows: the first time that J#       V(i) or 
V{p  j  V{fl, the owner of the derivative must exchange it for cash according to the schedule in 
(2). If no such events occur for t < T, then the security is redeemed at I=  T for cash according 
to (2). his called the tnafurilJ         (or expiration  date, or redemption  date)  of the 
derivative. The derivative  security  is thua defined  by specifying  the contingent payoff func- 
tions f   g;      fi2, and  T. In some cases, the schedules or the boundaries  Y(i) and  Y(I)  are  
contractually  specified;  in  others,  they are  determined  endo- genously as part of  the 
valuation  process, as in the case of the early-exercise boundary for an American-type option.
By arbitrage  restrictions,  the derivative  security will  have  fiNf& ñaéifiJ if
and only if gñ O, h Z 0, fK  0, and D  (0,  p  -  0.
V


















T
Figure I. Relevant region of li  J(0 s  Vt9 £Vf 0. 0 £ i S T


If (as drawn  in Figure 1)  the boundaries J(t), and V{I} are continuous func- tions,  then  
because  P(J   has a continuous sample path in i by Assumption  II, one has that (i)  if V(I) <  
Y(f) for some  f, then  there is a _f,  f c  i, so that V(lj  -- J(J) and (ii) if V(i) >P(I) for 
some fi then there is a i, f<  i, so that Y( td  =  F( i}. Hence,  in  this case,  the  
inequalities  for  P can  be  neglected  in  (2)  and  the only relevant region for analysis is 
J(i) 3 V(I) ñ  V(i), OS i S Ti
With  the derivativmsecurity characteristics fully specified,  we turn  now  to the  fundamental  
production  technology  for  hedging  the  risk  of issuing  a derivative security and for 
evaluating the cost of its production. To locate the derivation  in a more substantive  framework,  
I posit a hypothetical  financial intermediary that creates derivative securities in principal 
transactions for its customers  by selling them contracts which are its obligation.  It uses the 
cap- ital  markets or transactions with other institutions  to hedge  the contractual

94                                            Economic  Sciences  1997

liabilities  so  created  by dynamically  trading  in  the  underlying  securities  fol- lowing a 
strategy designed to reproduce the cash flows of  the issued contracts as accurately as it can. If 
the intermediary cannot perfectly replicate  the pay- offs to the issued derivative, it either 
obtains adequate equity to bear the resi- dual risks of  its imperfectly  hedged positions or it 
securitizes  those positions by  bundling  them  into  a  portfolio  for  a  special-purpose  
financial  vehicle which it then sells either in the capital market or to a consortium  of other 
in- stitutions in a process similar to the traditional reinsurance market. Although surely a 
caricature,  the following  description  is nevertheless  not far removed from real-world practice.
The  objective  is  to  find  a  feasible,  continuous-trading  portfolio  strategy constructed  
from  all  available  traded  assets  including  the  riskless  asset  that comes “closest” to 
satisfying  the following four properties:  if P(I)  denotes the value of the portfolio at time  /, 
then for 4 ñ t ñ  fi
(i)      at I, if V(i) ——  V(i), then P( t)  =  g   V  t) , t]
(ii)     at /, if F(f) —— V(t), then P(t)  = f[   V( t),  /]
(iii)    for each t, the payout rate on the portfolio is D2(V, I) dt
(iv)     at t ——  T, P(       ——  h [V(     ].

Call this portfolio  the “hedging  portfolio” for the derivative  security defined by (2). That 
portfolio  is labeled as “portfolio  (*) .” In  the special,  but impor- tant, case in which the 
portfolio meets the above conditions exactly, the hedg- ing portfolio is called the “replicating  
portfolio” for the derivative  security.
Bertsimas,  Kogan,  and  Lo (1997)  study  the  complementary   problem  of “closeness” of  dynamic 
 replication  where  they assume  that one  can  trade in the underlying asset but that trading is 
not continuous. They apply stochastic dynamic   programming   to   derive   optimal   strategies   
to   minimize   mean- squared tracking  error. These strategies are then employed in simulations  
to estimate  quantitatively how close one can get to dynamic  completeness.
Determine  the optimal  hedging  portfolio  in  two  steps: first, find  the port- folio  strategy  
constructed  from  all  continuously  traded  assets  that  has  the smallest  “tracking  error” in 
 replicating  the  returns  on  the  underlying  asset. For the underlying asset with price  Y, 
call this portfolio,  the “V-Fund.” In the second  step, derive  the  hedging  portfolio  for  the 
derivative  security as a dy- namic portfolio strategy mixing the  UFund with the riskless asset.
Let S,(I) denote the price of continuously  traded asset i at time  t. There are n such  risky 
assets plus  the riskless asset which  are traded continuously.  The dynamics  for  S  are assumed  
to follow a continuous-sample-path Itfi process given by
(3)                                       dS  —- m Si d   +   !    S! d‘i   • '     1›• • •›•
where  a,  is  the  instantaneous  expected  rate  of  return  on  asset  i;  dZ   is  a

Wiener process;
€f  - lS
the instantaneous  covariance  between  the returns on  i

and  j  [that is, (dS   S)
dS         —-  w   dt and        —— w; ²] ; let tj, be defined as the in-

Robert  C.  Merton                                                95

stantaneous correlation  between  dZ and  dZ in Assumption  II such that dZj dZ
= ii  dt. Let  S(t) denote the value of the  V-Fund  portfolio and  let  wi(t) denote the fraction  
of that portfolio allocated  to asset t, i-7,. . .,n  ,  at time  /. The   bal- ance of  the  
portfolio's  assets are  invested in  the riskless asset. The  dynamics
for 5 can be written as
(4)                                     dS -— [y S - D   (V t)] dt + 6 S dq



To create  the V-Fund,  the wi  are chosen so as to minimize  the unanticipated part  of the  
difference  between  the  return  on  the  underlying  asset  and  the traded portfolio's return. 
That is, at each point in time, the portfolio alloca- tion is chosen so as to minimize  the 
instantaneous variance  of [dS/S - dV/V]. As  shown  in  Merton  (1992,  Theorem  15.3,  p.501),  
the  portfolio  rule  that
does this is given  by (5)
where  e„ is the  kth-ith element of the  inverse of  the variance-covariance ma- trix  of  the  
returns  on  the  n  risky  continuously  traded  assets.  From  Merton (1992,  p.502),  the 
instantaneous  correlation  between  the  returns  on  the V-
Fund and  the underlying asset,  p dt —— dZ dq, can be written as

(6)

and

The   dynamics of the  tracking error can thus be written as
(8)                                      dS/S - dV/V —— (y    - m) dt + 8db
where  If  -  (1  -  p2)  w’ and   the Wiener  process  db  ——  (p  dq - dZ)      1 -  p*. As shown 
in Merton  (1992, eq. 15.51), it follows that
(9)                                          dS/St db —— 0 ,  i ——1,.   , n.
That is, the  tracking error in  (8)  is uncorrelated with the  returns on all trad- ed assets, 
which is a consequence  of picking the  portfolio strategy that mini- mizes that error.
With this, we now proceed with a “cookbook-like” derivation of the produc- tion  process  for  our  
hypothetical  financial  intermediary  to  best  hedge  the cash flows of  the  derivative  
securities it issues.  The  derivation  begins with  a description   of   the   activities   for   
the   intermediary's   quantitative-analysis (“quant”)  department which is responsible for 
gathering the variance-covari- ance information  necessary  to use  (5)  to construct and maintain  
the V-Fund portfolio.  It  is  also  assigned  the  responsibility to  solve  the  following  
linear parabolic partial differential equation for I[V, f]

96                   Economic  Sciences  1997


subject to the boundary conditions: for V{t)  < V<   V(i) and t < T,
(11)

(12)                                               y  Y(t),t] —— g[V(I), t] *  0



where F,₁     d’J@ W, FI  —— hF@ F,‘ and   Jq      HF@/. Note that the non-negativity conditions in 
 (11)—(13)  together with D2(0, I)  = 0 implies that the derivative security has limited liability. 
As a mathematical  question,  this is a well-posed
problem, and a solution  to (10) —(13)  exists and  is unique.
Having solved for  the  function         i],  the  quant department  has  the  pre- scribed ongoing 
tasks at each time t (0 S  t < T) to:
(i)      ask the trading desk for the prices of all traded assets necessary to deter- mine  the 
price  S(I)  of the V-Fund and the best estimate  of the current price of the underlying asset, 
V(t) ,
(ii)     compute from the solution  to (10)-(13)  compute
M( t)      F, [ V( t),  t] V( f);
(iii)    tell  the  trading  desk  that  the  strategy  of  portfolio  (*)  requires  that
$M(t)  be invested in the V-Fund for the period  t to I + dt
(iv)    compute Y(t)  ——     V(t), t] and store Y(t) in the intermedzary's data files for  (later)  
analysis of the  time series  (i.e., stochastic process)  Y(t) .

The prescription  for the execution  or trading-desk activities  of the interme- diary is as 
follows: At time  t —— 0, give the  trading desk $P(0)  as an initial fun- ding  (investment)  for 
portfolio  (*)  which contains  the V-Fund  asset and  the riskless asset. Let P(I) denote  the 
value of portfolio  (*) at  I, after having made any prescribed  cash distribution  (payment)  from 
 the  portfolio.  The  trading desk has the job at each time  I (0    t< T) to:
(a)     determine  the current prices of the underlying asset, V(t)  and all indi- vidual traded 
assets held in the V-Fund, and send that price information to the quant department;
(b)     pay  a  cash  distribution  of $D  [V(t),  fJdt  to  the  customer  holding  the derivative 
 security; by selling securities in the portfolio  (if necessary);
(c)     compute the value of the  balance of the  portfolio, P(t);
(d)     receive instructions on M(t) from the quant department;
(e)     readjust the portfolio allocation  so that $M(I)  is now invested in the V-
Fund and $  P(t) — M(t) ] is invested in the riskless asset.
It follows that the dynamics for  the value of portfolio  (*)  are  given by

Robert  C.   Merton                                                      97
(14)                 dP -- M(t) dS+  M(t) D ($’    dt + [P -- M(I))rdt -- D (V,t)dt

where

M(i) dS  =  price appreciation
S

M!t j D  ,(V,t   dt -- dividend payments received into the portfolio

P -  M(t))rdt  --   interest earned by the portfolio
D  (V,  t)dt       cash distribution  to customer
Voting  that M(I)  = Al [ V,I] V,  one  has  by substitution  from  (4)  into  (14)  that the 
dynamics of P satisfy

dP ---  F[V, I]VdS7S +  F[V, f]YD,(V, Ips  +  (P -  F,[V, I]V!rdt -  D  t V jdt
(15)


Return  now to  the quant department  to derive  the dynamics  for  Y(t) . From
(iv) , one has that Y(t)  = f{  Y, t}  for  V(/)  =  U  Because F is the solution  to  (10-- 13) , 
his   a twice-continuously differentiable function of  Vand  t. Therefore, we can apply Itfi's 
lemma, so that for  V(I)  =  V,
dY ----'[V,t]dV +  FZ[V, t)dt +       ',[V,t)(dV)²
(16)


because  (d        = a’V   2 dt. Because    [ V,f]  satisfies  (10) , one    has that

(17)                                       w² Y²J„  -- D, F, +  F   =  rF  -- rV    -- D

Substituting  (17)  into  (16) , one can rewrite  (16)  as

(18)

Note that the calculation  of F(i) and its dynamics by the quant department in no way requires 
knowledge of the time-series of values for portfolio  (*),  P(t)}, that are calculated by the 
trading desk. Putting these two time series together, we define  Q(t)  ----  P(t)  -- Y(t) . It 
follows  that dQ  ----  dP -   dY. Substituting  for dP from (15) and for dY  from  (18), 
rearranging terms using  (8), one has that
(19)                              d@ --  r@ dt +  E'   Y(  dS/S  - dVW)
--  (  r @ +  Ft  V/// - m)  )dt   +  F,   V  8 db.

At this point, we digress to examine  the special case in which  perfect replica-

98                   Economic  Sciences  1997

tion of the return  on the underlying  asset obtains  (i.e., p ——1  and there is no tracking  
error) . In that case, equation  (19)  reduces to an ordinary differen- tial equation  (    Q= r) 
with solution
(20)                                             Q(t)  —— Q(0)exp(rt)
where  @(0)  = P(0) —  Y(0) ——  P(0) — F fV(0), 0]. Therefore,  if the  initial funding provided   
to  the  trading  desk  for  portfolio   (*)   is  chosen  so  that  P(0)  ——
FfV( 0),0], then from  (20), Q(t)  ——  0 for all i and
(21)                                                  P(t)  —— F[Y(t),t]
By comparison  of (11)—( 13)  with  (2) , one has from  (21)  that the  (*) -portfo- lio strategy 
generates  the identical  payment flows and terminal  (and bound- ary)  values as  the derivative  
security described  at  the outset  of this analysis. That  is,  for  a one-time,  initial  
investment  of   F[V(0), 0],  a feasible  portfolio strategy  has  been  found  that  exactly  
replicates  the  payoffs  to  the  derivative security.  Thus,  $F[V(0), 0]  is  the  cost  to  the 
 intermediary  for  producing  the derivative.  If the derivative  securi]  is traded,  then  to 
avoid  (“conditional”) arbi- trage  (conditional  on  w,    D   ) , its price must satisfy
(22)                                             W(t)  —— P(t)  —— r'[Y(t), t].
Since the absence of arbitrage opportunities  is a necessary condition  for equi- librium, it 
follows that equilibrium  prices for derivative securities on continu- ously tradable underlying 
assets must satisfy  (22). This is, of course, the origi- nal  Black-Scholes  result and the V-Fund 
degenerates  into a single  asset,  the underlying asset itself. However, note that (22) obtains 
without assuming that the derivative-pricing function  is a twice-continuously differentiable 
function of V and t. The smoothness  of the pricing function  is instead a derived con- clusion.
Note further that the development of the  (*) -portfolio  strategy did not re- quire  that the 
derivative  security  (defined  by (2) ) actually trades in the capi- tal market.  The  (*) 
-portfolio strategy provides  the technology for “manufac- turing” or synthetically  creating  the 
cash  flows and payoffs  of the  derivative security if it does not exist. That is, if one 
describes a state-contingent sched- ule of outcomes for a portfolio  (i.e. specifies     g, h, D  , 
 T,  V( i), V(t) ) , then the (*) -portfolio strategy provides the trading rules to create  this 
pattern of pay- outs and it specifies  the cost of implementing  those rules. The cost of creat- 
ing  the security at  time  t  is  thus F[V( t) ,t].  Moreover,  if the  financial-services 
industry  is  competitive,  then  price  equals  marginal  cost,  and  (22)  obtains as  the  
formula  for  equilibrium  prices  of derivatives  sold  directly  by  inter- mediaries.
Returning  from  this  digression  to  the  case  of imperfect  replication,  one has,  by 
construction  of the process for  Y,  that Q——P-r is the cumulative  arith- metic  tracking error 
for the hedging portfolio. By inspection  of ( 19), the in- stantaneous  tracking  error for  the 
derivative  security  is perfectly  correlated with  the  tracking  error  of the V-Fund.  Hence,  
from  (9),  it follows  that  the tracking error for the  hedging portfolio is uncorrelated  with  
the returns on

Robert  C.  Merton                                                99

all  continuously  traded  assets.  Using  this lack  of  correlation  with  any other traded 
asset, I now argue that in this case the  replication-based valuation can be used for pricing the 
derivative security even  though  replication  is not  fea- sible.
As we  know,  in  all equilibrium  asset-pricing  models,  assets  that  have  only non-systematic  
or  diversifiable  risk  are  priced  to  yield  an  expected  return equal  to  the  riskless  
rate of interest. The  condition  satisfied  by  the  tracking- error  component  of  the   hedging 
 portfolio  satisfies  an  even  stronger  no- correlation  condition  than either a zero-beta 
asset in  the CAPM, a zero mul- tibeta  asset  of  the  Intertemporal  CAPM,  or  a  zero  
factor-risk  asset  of  the Arbitrage  Pricing  Theory.  Thus,  by  any  of  those  theories,  the  
equilibrium condition from either  (8)  or  (19)  is that


If (23) obtains, it follows immediately  that the equilibrium price for the deri- vative  security  
is F[V(I),  /J,  the  same  formula  “as  if’   the  underlying  asset  is traded continuously. And 
as a consequence,  the Black-Scholes formula would apply even in those applications  in which  the 
underlying asset is not traded.
As is well known from the literature on incomplete markets,  (23)  need not obtain  if the creation 
 of the new derivative  security helps complete  the mar- ket for a large enough subset of 
investors  that the incremental dimension  of risk spanned by this new instrument is “priced” as a 
systematic risk factor with an expected return  different from  the riskless interest rate. Markets 
 tend to remain incomplete with respect to a particular risk either because the cost of creating  
the securities necessary to span  that risk exceeds  the benefits, or be- cause  non-verifiability, 
 moral-hazard,  or  adverse-selection  problems  render the  viability  of such  securities  
untenable.  Generally,  major  macro  risks  for which  significant  pools of investors want  to 
manage  their exposures  are  not controllable  by any group of investors, and it is unlikely that 
any group would have  systematic  access  to  materially  better  information  about  those  risks. 
Hence,  the  usual  asymmetric-information  and  incentive  reasons  given  for market failure  do 
not seem  to  be present. In systems  with well-developed fi- nancial  institutions  and  markets  
and with  today's  financial  technology,  it  is thus not readily apparent what factors make the 
cost of developing standard- ized derivative  markets  (e.g., futures,  swaps,  options)  
prohibitive  if, in large scale,  there  is a significant  premium  latently waiting  to  be  paid  
by investors who currently participate  in the markets.  On a more prosaic  empirical  note, in 
most applications  of the option-pricing model,  the “residual” or tracking- error variations are 
likely to be specific  to the underlying project, firm, insti- tution, or person, and thereby they 
are unlikely candidates for macro-risk sur- rogates. These observations  support the prospects for 
(23)  to obtain.
However,  the risk need not be macro in scope in order to be significant  to one  investor  or a 
small  group  of investors.  Obvious  examples  of  such  risks would  be various  firm- or  
person-specific  components  of human  capital,  in- cluding death and disability risks. To make a 
case for instruments with  these types of exposures to be priced with a risk premium, 
incomplete-market mod-

100                                        Economic  Sciences  1992

els often focus on the “incipient-demand” (or “maximum reservation”)  price or risk premium that an 
investor would pay to eliminate a risk that is not cov- ered in the market by the existing set of 
securities. In the abstract,  that price, of course,  can  be quite substantial.  However,  
arguments  along  these lines to explain financial product pricing implicitly assume a rather 
modest and static financial-services sector. A classic  example  is life insurance.  Risk-averse  
indi- viduals with families may, if necessary, be willing to pay a considerable premi- um for life 
insurance, well in excess of  the actuarial mortality risk, even after taking into account 
moral-hazard and person-specific informational asymme- tries.  Moreover,  if the  analysis  further 
 postulates  a financial  sector  so  crude that bilateral contracts between risk-averse  
individuals  are the only way to ob- tain  such  insurance,  then  the  equilibrium  price  for  
such  insurance  in  that model can be so large that few, if any, contracts are created. But, such 
models are  a poor descriptor  of  the real world.  If  the  institutions  and markets were really 
that limited,  the  incentives for change  and innovation would  be enor- mous.  Modern  finance  
technology  and experience  in  implementing  it pro- vide  the  means for such  change. And  if, 
instead,  one admits into  the  model just the classic mechanism for organizing an “insurance” 
institution  (whether government-run  or private-sector)  to take advantage  of  the enormous 
diver- sification  benefits  of  pooling  such  risks  and  subdividing  them  among  large numbers 
of participants, then the equilibrium price equals the “supply” price of such insurance contracts 
which approaches the actuarial rate.
As is typical in analyses of other industries, the equilibrium  prices of finan- cial products and 
services are more closely linked to the costs of  the efficient producers than to the inefficient 
ones (except perhaps as a very crude upper bound to those prices) . Furthermore,  the institutional 
 structure  of the finan- cial  system  is  neither  exogenous  nor  fixed.  In  theory  and  in  
practice,  that structure changes in response to changing technology and to profit-opportu- nities  
for  creating  new  products  and  existing  products  more  efficiently.  As discussed at length 
elsewhere  (Merton  1992, pp. 457-467; 535-536), a financi- al sector with a rich and 
well-developed structure  of institutions can justify a “quasi-dichotomy” modeling approach  to the 
pricing of real and financial as- sets that employs  “reduced-form” equilibrium  models with a 
simple financial sector in which all agents are assumed to be minimum-cost  information  pro- 
cessors  and  trarisactors.  However,  distortions  of  insights  into  the  real  world can  occur 
 if significant  costs for  the  agents  are  introduced  into  that  model while the simple 
financial sector is retained as an unchanged assumption. Put simply,  high  transaction  and  
information  costs  for  most  of  the  economy's agents  to directly  create  their  own  
financial  products  and services  does  not imply that equilibrium asset prices are influenced by 
those high costs, as long as  there  is  an  efficient  financial-service  industry  with  
low-cost,  reasonably competitive  producers.
In considering the preceding technical analysis, one might wonder if there
are relevant  situations  in which  the price  is observable  but trade  in  the asset cannot take 
place? One common class of real-world instances is characterized as follows:  consider an  
insurance  company that has guaranteed  the financial

Robert  C. Merton                                              101

performance  of  the  liabilities  of  a  privately-held opaque  institution  with  a 
mark-to-market portfolio  of assets.  The  market value  of that portfolio  (cor- responding  to V 
in the analysis  here)  is provided to the guarantor on a con- tinuous  basis,  but  the  portfolio 
 itself cannot  be  traded  by  the  guarantor  to hedge its exposure  because it does not know the 
assets held within  the port- folio. Elsewhere  (Merton,  1997a) , I have  developed  a model  
using an  alter- native  approach  of incentive-contracting combined with  the derivative-secu- 
rity technology to analyze the problem of contract guarantees  for an opaque institution. It is 
nevertheless the case that discontinuous  tradability of an asset is often accompanied  by 
discontinuous  observations  of its price. And so, the combination  of the  two  warrants  
attention.  Hence,  I complete  this  section with consideration  of how to modify the valuation  
formula if the price of the underlying asset V is not continuously observable.
Suppose  that in  the example  adopted  in this section,  the price  of the un-
derlying asset is observed at t=0 and then again at the maturity of the deriva- tive  contract,  
t=T.  In  between,  there  is  neither  direct  observation   nor  in- ferential information  from 
payouts on  the asset. Hence, D  (V,I)  —-  0, and the derivative security has no payouts or 
interim “stopping points” prior to matu- rity  [as specified  in  (l l)   and  (12)]  contingent  
on  V(I).  tt  is however  known that  the  dynamics  of  V are  as  described  in Assumption  II  
with  a covariance structure  with  available  traded  assets  sufficiently  well  specified  to  
construct the V-Fund according to (5). Define the random variable  X(t) ——  V(t)/S(t),  the 
cumulative proportional tracking error, with  X(0) —— 1. By applying Ito’s lemma, one has from  (8) 
, (9) , and  (23)  that the dynamics for X can be written as
(24)                                                 dX —— 8 X db.
It follows from  (24)  that the distribution  for  X(I), conditional  on  X(0)  —— 1, is lognormal  
with  the  expected  value  of  X(t)  equal  to  l  and  the  variance  of ln/X(t)J equal to tft. 
Thepartial differential equation for F, corresponding  to (10),  that  determines  the  hedging 
strategy  uses as its independent  variable the  best estimate of V(t), which is S(t), and  it is 
written as
(25)                    0 -— ’/1          S’ F    [S,t] + rS F  [S t] -rF[S, t] + F  [S,t],
subject to the terminal-time  boundary condition  that for S(T-)  -— S,
(26)                                          F[S, TJ —— E (  h(SX)  J
where  /i is as defined in  (13) , X is a lognormally distributed random variable with E(  X  J  —- 
1 and variance of In {Xj  equal to tfT  and E[  / is the expectation operator over the distribution 
 of X.
Condition  (26) reflects the fact that for all   <  T, the best estimate of V(t) is S(t). However, 
at I -  T  V(T) is revealed and the value of  S  yumps” by the total cumulative  tracking error of 
X(T) from its value  S at t —— T- to S(T)  —— V(T). The effect of the underlying  asset price not 
being observable  is perhaps well-illu- strated by comparing the solution for the European-type  
call option with the classic Black-Scholes solution given here in (1). The solution to (25) and 
(26) with  h(V)  -— max  [0, V - L]  is given by, for 0 <  I < T,

102                                        Economic  Sciences  1997

(21)                          F[S, t])  —— S N(u) - L exp(-r[T-t]) N(u -     /)
where  u = (  In[S/L] +r[T-t]  + //2 )  /     /,   / —— I(T-t) + IT,    and N()  is the cumul-
ative density function for the standard  normal distribution.
By inspection of (1) and  (27) , the key difference in the option-pricing for- mula with and 
without continuous observation of the underlying asset price is that the variance over the 
remaining life of the option does not go to zero as t  approaches  T,  because  of the  ‘jump” 
event  at  the  expiration  date  corre- sponding  to the cumulative  effect of tracking error.
This  section  has  explored  conditions  under  which  the  Black-Scholes  op- tion-pricing  model 
can  be validly applied  to the pricing  of assets with  deriv- ative-security-like  structures,  
even  when  the  underlying  asset-equivalent  is neither continuously  traded nor continuously 
observable. A fuller analysis of this  question  would  certainly  take  account  of the  
additional  tracking  error that obtains  as  a consequence  of imperfect  dynamic  trading  of  
the  V-Fund portfolio,  along  the  lines  of Bertsimas,  Kogan,  and  Lo  (1997) .  However,  a 
more  accurate  assessment  of  the  real-world  impact should  also  take into ac- count other 
risk-management tools that intermediaries have to reduce track- ing error. For instance, as 
developed in analytical detail in Merton  (1992, pp. 450—457) ,  intermediaries need  only use 
dynamic  trading  to  hedge  their  net derivative-security exposures to various underlying assets. 
For a real-world in- termediary with a large book of various derivative products, netting, which in 
effect extends  the capability for hedging to include trading in securities with “non-linear”   
pay-off  structures,   can  vastly  reduce   the  size  and  even   the frequency  of  the  hedging 
 transactions  necessary  to  achieve  an  acceptable level of tracking error. Beyond this, as part 
of their optimal risk management, intermediaries can  “shade”  their  bid  and  offer  prices  
among  their  various products to encourage  more or less customer activity in different products  
to help manage their exposures. The limiting case when the net positions of cus- tomer   exposures  
 leaves   the  intermediary   with   no   exposure   is  called   a “matched  book.”

APPLICATIONS  OF THE OPTION-PRICING TECHNOLOGY
Open  the  financial  section  of  a  major  newspaper  almost  anywhere  in  the world  and  you  
will find  pages devoted  to  reporting  the  prices of exchange- traded  derivative  securities,  
both  futures  and  options.  Along  with  the  vast over-the-counter  derivatives  market,  these  
exchange  markets  trade  options and futures on individual stocks, stock-index and  mutual-fund  
portfolios, on bonds and other fixed-income securities of every maturity, on currencies, and on  
commodities  including  agricultural  products,  metals,  crude  oil  and  re- fined products, 
natural gas, and  even, electricity. The  volume of transactions in these markets is often many 
times larger than the volume in the underlying cash-market  assets. Options  have  traditionally  
been  used  in  the  purchase  of real  estate  and  the  acquisition  of  publishing  and  movie  
rights.  Employee stock options have long been granted to key employees and  today represent a

Robert  C.  Merton                                              103

significantly  growing  proportion  of  total  compensation,   especially  for  the more highly 
paid workers in the United States. In all these markets, the same option-pricing methodology  set 
forth in the preceding  section is widely used both  to  price  and  to  measure  the  risk  
exposure  from  these  derivatives  (cf. Jarrow and Rudd  [1983]  and Cox and Rubinstein  [1985] ) 
. However,  financi- al options represent only one of several categories of applications for the 
op- tion-pricing  technology.
In  the  late  1960s  and early  1970s when  the  basic  research  leading  to  the Black-Scholes  
model was  underway,  options were  seen  as rather  arcane  and specialized  financial  
instruments.  However,  both  Black  and  Scholes  (1972, 1973)  and I  (Merton,  1970,1974)  
recognized  early on  in  the research  effort that the same approach  used to price options could 
be applied to a variety of other  valuation  problems.  Perhaps  the  first  major  development  of 
 this  sort was  the  pricing  of  corporate  liabilities,  the  “right-hand  side”  of  the  
firm's balance  sheet.  This  approach  to valuation  treated  the  wide  array  of  instru- ments 
used to finance firms such as debentures,  convertible  bonds, warrants, preferred  stock, and 
common  stock  (as well as a variety of  hybrid securities) as derivative securities with their 
contractual payouts ultimately dependent on the value of the overall firm. In contrast to the 
standard fragmented valuation methods of the time, it provided a unified theory for pricing  these 
liabilities. Because application  of the pricing methodology does not require a history of trading  
in  the  particular  instrument  to  be  evaluated,  it  was  well-suited  for pricing  new  types  
of  financial  securities  issued  by  corporations  in  an  inno- vating environment. Applications 
 to corporate finance along this line develo-
ped rapidly  0
“Option-like”  structures  were  soon  seen  to  be  lurking  everywhere;  thus there came an 
explosion  of research in applying option-pricing theory which still continues.  Indeed,  I could  
not do full justice  to the list of  contributions accumulated  over the past 25 years even  if 
this entire  paper were devoted to that endeavor.  Fortunately,  a major effort to do just that is 
underway and the results will soon  be available  (}in, Kogan, Lim, Taylor, and Lo, forthcoming) . 
The  authors  have  generously  shared  their  findings  with  me.  And  so,  I  can convey here 
some sense of  the  breadth  of applications  and be necessarily in- complete without harm.
The put option  is a basic option  which gives its owner the right to sell  the underlying asset at 
a specified  (“exercise”)  price on or before a given  (“expi- ration”)  date. When purchased in 
conjunction  with ownership  of  the under- lying asset, it is functionally equivalent  to an 
insurance  policy that protects its owner against economic loss from a decline in the asset's value 
below the ex- ercise  price  for  any  reason,  where  the  term  of the  insurance  policy  corre- 
sponds to the expiration date. Hence, option-pricing theory can be applied to value insurance 
contracts. An early insurance application of the Black-Scholes

See  Merton   (1992,  pp.  423—427)   for  an  extensive  list  of  references.  See  also  Gregory 
 D. Hawkins  (1982)  and Michael J.  Brennan and Eduardo S. Schwartz  (1985a)  and the early 
empiri- cal testing by E. Philip Jones et al.  (1984) .

104                                        Economic  Sciences  1997

model  was  to  the  pricing  of  loan  guarantees  and  deposit  insurance   (cf., Merton,  
1977a). A contract  that insures against losses in value  caused  by de- fault on promised payments 
 on a contract in effect is equivalent  to a put op- tion on the contract with an exercise price 
equal to the value of  the contract if it were default-free.  Loan and other contract guarantees,  
collectively called credit  derivatives,  are  ubiquitous  in  the  private  sector.  Indeed,  
whenever  a debt instrument is purchased in which there is any chance that the promised payments 
will not be made, the purchaser is not only lending money but also in effect issuing a loan 
guarantee as a form of self-insurance. Another private- sector application  of options analysis is 
in  the valuation  of catastrophic-insu- rance reinsurance  contracts and bonds     Dual funds and 
exotic options pro- vide various financial insurance and minimum-return-guarantee products."
Almost surely, the largest issuer of such guarantees are governments. In the United States, the 
Office of the Management of the Budget is required  by law to value  those  guarantees.  The  
option  model  has been  applied  to assess de- posit  insurance,  pension  insurance,  guarantees  
of  student  loans  and  home mortgages,  and loans  to small  businesses  and some  large ones as 
well.” The application  to government  activities  goes  beyond just providing  guarantees. The 
model  has been  used  to determine  the cost of other subsidies including farm-price  supports  
and  through-put  guarantees  for pipelines.“  It  has  been applied  to value  licenses  issued 
with  limiting quotas such as for taxis or fish- eries  or  the  right  to  pollute  and  to value  
the government's  right  to change those quotas. ⁱ’ Government sanctions patents. The decision 
whether to spend the resources  to acquire  a patent depends  on  the value  of  the  patent which 
can be framed as an option-pricing problem. Indeed, even on something that is  not  currently  
commercial,   one  may  acquire   the  patent  for  its  “option value,” should economic conditions 
change in an unexpected way.“ Paddock, Siegel, and Smith  (1988)  show that option value can be a 
significant  propor- tion of  the  total valuation  of government-granted offshore drilling rights, 
es- pecially when  current and expected  future  economic  conditions  would  not support 
development  of the fields. Option-pricing analysis quantifies the gov- ernment's economic  
decision whether  to build roads in less-populated areas

"  Cf.  Alan  Kraus  and  Ross  (1982),  Neil  A.  Doherty  and James  R.  Garven   (1986) , J.   
David Cummins  (1988) , Cummins and Hélyette Geman  (1995) , and Scott E. Harrington ct al. (1995). 
”  Brennan  and  Schwartz  (1976) , Jonathan  J.  Ingersoll,  J•  (1976) ,  M.  Barry  Goldman  et  
al.
(1979), Mary Ann Gatto et al. (1980) , and René Stulz  (1982) . In an early real-world application,
Myron  Scholes  and  I  developed  the  first  option+strategy  mutual  fund  in  the  United  
States, Money Market/Options investments, Inc., in February 1976. The strategy which invested 90 
per- cent of its assets in money market instruments and ten percent in a diversified  portfolio of 
stock call options provided equity exposure on the upside with a guaranteed “floor” on the value of 
the portfolio.  The  return  patterns  from  this  and  similar  “floor"  strategies  were  later  
published  in Merton, et al.  (1978, 1982) .
i’ Howard  B. Sosin  (1980) , Carliss Baldwin, Donald Lessard, and Scott P. Mason  (1983) , Donald
F. Cunningham and Patric H. Hendershott (1984) , Alan j.  Marcus (1987) , Merton and Zvi Bodie 
(1992), Bodie  (1996) , Ashoka Mody  (1996) , and Robert S. Neal  (1996) .
"  Scott P. Mason  and Merton  (1985) , Calum  G. Turvey and Vincent Amanor-Boadu  (1989)  and 
Taehoon Kang and B. Wade Brorsen  (1995) .
"James E. Anderson  (1987)  and Jonathan  M. Karpoff (1989) . "  Lenos Trigeorgis  (1993) .

Robert  C.   Merton                                                      105

depending on whether it has the policy option to abandon rural roads if they are not used enough.”
Various  legal  and  tax  issues  involving  policy  and  behavior  have  been  ad- dressed  using  
the  option  model.  Among  them  is  the valuation  of  plaintiffs' litigation  options,  
bankruptcy  laws  including  limited-liability provisions,  tax delinquency on real estate and 
other property as an option to abandon or re- cover  the  property  by  paying  the  arrears,  tax  
evasion,  and  valuing  the  tax “timing” option for the capital-gains  tax in a circumstance when 
only realiza- tion of losses and gains on investments  triggers a taxable event.“
In a recent preliminary study,  the options structure  has been  employed  to help model the 
decision  of whether  the Social Security fund should invest in equities  (Smetters  1997) . As can 
 be  seen  in  the  option  formula  of  the  pre- ceding section, the value of an option depends 
on the volatility of  the under- lying asset.  The Federal  Reserve  uses as one  of its indicators 
 of  investor  un- certainty  about  the  future  course  of  interest  rates,  the  “implied”  
volatility derived  from  option  prices  on  government  bonds.'9   In  his  last  paper,  pub- 
lished after his death, Fischer  Black  (1995)  applies  options  theory  to model the  process  
for  the  interest  rates  that govern  the  dynamics  of government bond prices. In another area 
involving central-bank  concerns, Perold  ( 1995) shows how the introduction  of various types of  
derivatives  contracts has help- ed reducepotential systemic-risk problems in the payment system 
from settle- ment  exposures.  The  Black-Scholes  model  can  be  used  to  value  the  “free 
credit option” implicitly offered to participants, in addition to “float,” in mar- kets with  other 
 than  instantaneous  settlement  periods.  See  also Kupiec  and White  (1996) . The  prospective  
application  of  derivative-security  technology to enhance  central-bank  stabilization  policies  
in  both  interest  rates and cur- rencies is discussed in Merton  ( 1995, 1997b) .
In an application  involving government activities far removed from sophis- ticated  and  
relatively  efficient  financial  markets,  options  analysis  has  been used  to provide  new  
insights  into  optimal  government  planning  policies  in developing  countries. A view held by 
some in development  economics about the optimal  educational  policy for  less-developed  
countries  is that once  the expected future  needs for  labor-force  composition  are determined,  
the  op- timal  education  policy should  be  to pursue  targeted  training  of  the specific 
skills  forecast  and  in  the  quantities  needed.  The  alternative  of  providing either  more 
general  education  and  training  in  multiple  skills  or  training  in skills  not expected  to  
be  used  is seen  as a  “luxury”  that  poorer,  developing countries  could  not  afford.  It,  
of  course,  was  understood,  that  forecasts  of future  labor-training  needs  were  not  
precise.  Nevertheless,   the  basic  pre- scription  formally  treated  them  as if  they were.  
In  S. J.  Merton  (1992) ,  the question  is revisited,  this time with an explicit recognition  
of the uncertainty

" Cathy A. Hamlett and C. Phillip Baumel  (1990) .
”  George  M.  Constantinides  and  Ingersoll   (1984) ,  Brendan   O'Flaherty   (1990) ,  William  
J. Blanton  (1995) , Paul G. Mahoney  (199a) , and Charles T. Terry (1995) .
” Sylvia Nasar (1992) . See Bodie and Merton  (1995) for an overview article on implied volatility 
as an example of the informational  role of asset and option prices.

106                 Economic  Sciences  1997

about future labor requirements embedded in the model. The analysis shows that  the value  of  
having  the  option  to change  the skill  mix and  skill  type  of the labor force over a 
relatively short period of time can exceed the increased cost  in  terms  of  longer  education  
periods  or  less-deep  training  in  any  one skill. The Black-Scholes model is used to quantify 
that tradeoff. In a different context  of  the  private-sector  in  a  developed  country,  the  
same  technique could be used to assess the cost-benefit tradeoff for a company to pay a higher 
wage for a labor force with additional skills not expected to be used in return for the flexibility 
 to employ those skills if the unexpected  happens.
The discussion  of labor education and training decisions and litigation and taxes leads  naturally 
 into  the  subject  of  human  capital  and  household  deci- sion-making. The individual decision 
as to how much vocational education  to acquire  can  be formulated  as an  option-valuation  
problem  in which  the  op- timal exercise conditions reflect when  to stop training and start 
working." In the classic  labor-leisure  tradeoff,  one whose job  provides  the flexibility to in- 
crease  or  decrease  the  number  of  hours worked,  and  hence  his  total  com- pensation,  on  
relatively  short  notice,  has a valuable  option  relative  to  those whose  available  work  
hours are fixed."'  Wage  and pension-plan  “floors” that provide for a minimum compensation, and 
even tenure for university profes- sors  (McDonald  1974) ,  have  an  option-like  structure.  
Other  options  com- monly a part of household  finance  are: the commitment  by an institution  to 
provide a mortgage  to the house  buyer, if he chooses to get one; the pre-pay- ment right, after 
he takes  the mortgage,  that gives  the homeowner  the right to  renegotiate  the  interest  rate  
paid  to  the  lender  if rates  fall;” a car  lease which  gives  the  customer  the  right,  but  
not  the  obligation,  to  purchase  the car  at  a  pre-specified  price  at  the  end  of  the  
lease.’3   Health-care  insurance contains varying degrees of flexibility,  a major one being 
whether  the consu- mer agrees in advance  to use only a pre-specified set of doctors and hospitals 
(“HMO  plan”)  or  he  retains  the  right  to choose  an  “out-of-plan”  doctor  or hospital  
(“point-of-service” plan) .  In  the  consumer  making  the  decision  on which  to  take and  the  
health  insurer  assessing  the  relative  cost of providing the  two  plans,  each  solves an  
option-pricing problem  as to  the value  of  that flexibility." Much the same structure of 
valuation  occurs in choosing between “pay-per-view” and “flat-fee" payment for cable-television 
services.
Many of  the preceding option-pricing applications do not involve financial
instruments.  The  family  of  such  applications  is  called  “real”  options.  The most  
developed  area  for  real-option  application  is  investment  decisions  by firms.” However,  
real-options  analysis  has also  been applied  to real-estate  in-

*  Uri Dothan and Joseph Williams  (1981) . "' Bodie et al.  (1992) .
^ Kenneth  B. Dunn and John J.  McConnell  (1981)  and Brennan  and Schwartz  (1985b) . "  Stephen  
E. Miller  (1995) .
"‘ Hayes et al.  (1993) and Magiera and McLean  (1996) .
”  Mason and Merton  (1985) , Robert L. McDonald and Daniel R. Siegel  (1985) , Saman Majd and 
Robert  S.  Pindyck  (1987) , Alexander j.  Triantis and James E. Hodder  (1990) , Avinash  K.  
Dixit and Pindyck  (1994) , Nancy A. Nichols  (1994) , Trigeorgis  (1996)  and Keith J.  Leslie and 
Max P. Michaels  (1997) .

Robert  C.   Merton                                                        107

vestment  and  development  decisions.“  The  common  element  for using  op- tion-pricing  here is 
the same  as in  the preceding  examples:  the future is un- certain  (if it were  not,  there 
would be no need to create options  because we know now what we will do later) and in an uncertain  
environment,  having the flexibility  to decide what to do after some of  that uncertainty  is 
resolved de- finitely has value. Option-pricing theory provides the means for assessing that value.
The  major  categories  of  options  within  project-investment valuations  are: the option  to 
initiate or expand,  the option  to abandon  or contract, and  the option  to wait, slow-down,  or 
speed-up development.  There are “growth” op- tions which  involve  creating  excess  capacity  as 
an  option  to  expand  and  re- search   and   development   as   creating   the   opportunity   
to   produce   new products and even  new businesses,  but not the obligation  to do so if they are 
not economically viable."
A few  examples:  For  real-world  application  of  the  options  technology  in valuing  product  
development  in  the  pharmaceutical  industry,  see  Nichols (1994) . In the generation of 
electric power, the power plant can be construc- ted to use a single fuel such as oil or natural 
gas or it can  be  built to operate on either. The value of that option is the ability to use the 
least-cost, available fuel at each  point in time and the cost of that optionality is manifest in 
both the higher cost of construction  and less-efficient energy conversion  than with the  
corresponding   specialized  equipment.  A  third  example  described  in Luehrman  (1992)  comes  
from  the  entertainment  industry and involves  the decision about making a sequel to a movie:  
the choices are: either to produce both  the original  movie and its sequel at the same  time, or 
wait and produce the   sequel   after   the   success   or  failure   of   the   original   is   
known.   One does not have  to be a movie-production expert to guess that the incremental cost of  
producing  the  sequel  is going  to  be  less if  the  first  path  is followed. While  this is 
done, more  typically  the latter is chosen,  especially with  higher- budget films. The economic 
reason  is that the second approach  provides the option  not to make  the sequel  (if, for 
example, the original is not a success) . If  the  producer  knew  (almost  certainly)   that  the  
sequel  will  be  produced, then the option value of waiting for more information is small and the 
cost of doing the sequel separately is likely to exceed the benefit. Hence, once again, we see that 
 the amount  of uncertainty  is critical  to  the decision,  and  the op- tion-pricing  model 
provides the means for quantifying  the cost/benefit trade- off. As a last example,  Baldwin  and 
Clark  (1999)  develop  a model for desig- ning complex production systems focused around the 
concept of modularity. They exemplify their central theme with several industrial examples which 
in- clude  computer  and automobile  production.  Modularity  in production  pro- vides options.  
In assessing  the value  of  modularity  for production,  they em-


“ V. Kerry Smith  (1984) , Raymond Chiang et al.  (1986) , David Geltner and William C. Wheaton 
(1989), Joseph  T. Williams  (1991), and F. Christian  Zinkhan  (1991) .
*   W.  Carl  Kester  (1984) ,  Robyn  McLaughlin  and  Robert  A.  Taggart  (1992)  and  Terrance  
W. Faulkner  (1996) .

108                                        Economic  Sciences  199'7

ploy  an  option-pricing  type  of methodology,  where  complexity  in  the  pro-
duction  system is comparable  to uncertainty in  the financial one."
In each of these real-option examples as with a number of the  other appli- cations  discussed  in  
this  section,  the  underlying  “asset”  is  rarely  traded  in anything  approximating  a 
continuous  market  and  its price  is  therefore  not continuously  observable  either.  For  that 
 reason,  this paper,  manifestly focu- sed  on  applications,  devotes so  much  space  to  the  
technical  section  on  ex- tending the Black-Scholes  option-pricing framework to include 
non-tradabil- ity and  non-observability.

FUTURE  DIRECTIONS OF APPLICATIONS
As I suggested at the outset, innovation  is a central force driving the financial system  toward  
greater  economic  efficiency  with  considerable  economic  be- nefit having accrued from the 
changes since the time that the option-pricing papers  were  published.  Indeed,  much  financial  
research  and  broad-based practitioner  experience developed  over that period have led to vast 
improve- ments in our understanding  of how to apply the new financial technologies  to manage  
risk.  Moreover, we have seen  how wide ranging  are the applications of   our   technology   for   
pricing   and   measuring   the   risk   of   derivatives. Nevertheless,   there  still  remains  
an  intense  uneasiness  among  managers, regulators,  politicians,  the  press,  and  the  public  
over  these  new  derivative- security activities  and  their perceived  risks  to financial  
institutions.  And  this seems  to be the case even though  the huge financial disruptions,  such 
as the savings-and-loan  debacle  of  the  1980s  in  the  United  States  and  the  current 
financial  crises in Asia and some  emerging  markets, appear  to be the conse- quence of the more 
traditional risks taken by institutions such as commercial, real-estate, and less-developed-country 
lending, loan guarantees,  and equity- share holdings.
One conjecture  attributes  this uneasiness  to the frequently cited instances
of  individual  costly  events  that are  alleged  to  be associated  with  derivatives, such as 
the failure of Barings Bank, Proctor and Gamble's losses on complex interest-rate  contracts,  the 
financial distress of  Orange County, and so forth. Perhaps.”  But,  as already  noted,  
derivatives  are  ubiquitous  in  the  financial world  and  thus,  they are  likely  to  be  
present  in  any financial  circumstance, whether or not their use has anything causal to do with 
the resulting financial outcomes. However, even if all these allegations were valid, the sheer fact 
that we  are able  to associate  individual  names with  these  occurrences  instead  of mere  
numbers  (“XYZ  company”  instead  of “475—500  thrifts” as  the  relevant

^ See also Hau He and Pindyck  (1992) . On an entirely different application, Kester's 1984 ana- 
lysis of whether to develop products in parallel or sequentially could be applied to the evaluation 
of alternative strategies for funding basic scientific research: is it better to support N 
different re- search  approaches  simultaneously or just  to support  one or two and  then  use  
the resulting out- comes to sequence future research approaches?  See also Merton  (1992, p. 426).
^ Merton  H. Miller  (1997)  provides  a cogent analysis  refuting  many of the  specific-case  
allega- tions of derivatives misuse.

Robert  C.   Merton                                                      109

descriptor)  would  suggest  that  these  are  relatively  isolated  eventwunfortu- nate 
pathologies rather than indicators of systemic flaws. In contrast, the phy- siology  of  this  
financial  technology,  that  is,  how it works when  it works as it should, is not the subject of 
daily reports from around the globe but is essen- tially taken for granted.
An  alternative  or supplementary  conjecture  about  the  sources  of the col- lective  anxiety  
over  derivatives  holds  that  they  are  a part  of  a wider  imple- mentation of financial 
innovations which have required major changes in the basic  institutional  hierarchy  and  in  the  
infrastructure  to  support  it. As a re- sult, the knowledge  base now required to manage and 
oversee financial insti- tutions differs greatly from the traditional training and experience of 
many fi- nancial  managers  and  government  regulators.  Experiential  changes  of  this sort are  
threatening.  It is difficult  to deal with  change  that is  exogenous  to our  traditional  
knowledge  base  and framework  and  thus comes  to  seem  be- yond  our  control.  Decreased  
understanding  of  the  new  environment  can create  a  sense  of  greater  risk  even  when  the  
objective  level  of  risk  in  the system  remains  unchanged  or  is  actually  reduced.  If  so, 
 we  should  start  to deal with the problem now since the knowledge gap may widen if the current 
pace  of  financial  innovation,  as  some  anticipate,  accelerates  into  the  21" century.  
Moreover,  greater  complexity  of  products  and  the  need  for  more rapid decision-making will 
probably increase  the reliance  on  models, which in  turn  implies a growing  place for elements 
of mathematical  and computa- tional maturity in  the knowledge  base of  managers.  Dealing with  
this knowl- edge  gap  offers  considerable  challenge  to  private  institutions  and  govern- 
ment  as  well  as  considerable  opportunity  to  schools  of  management  and engineering  and to 
university departments of economics and mathematics.
There are two essentially different frames of reference for trying to analyze and  understand  
changes  in  the  financial  system.  One  perspective  takes  as given the existing institutional 
structure of financial service providers, wheth- er  governmental  or private-sector, and examines 
what can  be done  to make those institutions  perform  their particular financial services more 
efficiently and profitably. An alternative  to this traditional institutional  perspective—and the 
one I favor—is  the functional perspective,  which  takes as given  the econo- mic functions served 
by the hnancial system and examines what is the best in- stitutional  structure  to  perform  those 
 functions.”  The  basic  functions  of  a financial system are essentially the same in all 
economies, which  makes them far more stable, across time and across geopolitical  borders,  than  
the identity and  structure  of  the  institutions  performing  them.  Thus,  a functional  per- 
spective offers a more robust frame of reference than an institutional one, es- pecially  in a 
rapidly changing  financial  environment.  It is difficult  to use  in- stitutions  as  the  
conceptual  “anchor”  for  analyzing   the  evolving  financial system when  the institutional  
structure  is itself changing  significantly, as has been  the case for the past two decades and as 
appears likely to continue well

"  For elaboration  on  the functional  perspective,  see  Merton  (1993,  1995) , Crane  et al.  
(1995) , and Bodie and Merton  (1998) .

110                 Economic  Sciences  1997

into   the  future.   In   contrast,   in   the   functional   perspective,   institutional change 
is endogenous,  and may therefore  prove especially useful  in predict- ing the future direction  
of financial innovation, changes in financial markets and intermediaries, and regulatory design.”
The successful  private-sector and governmental  financial service providers and overseers  in  the 
impending future will be those who can address the dis- ruptive  aspects  of  innovation  in  
financial  technology  while  still  fully  exploi- ting its efficiency benefits. What types of 
research and training will be needed to manage  financial institutions?  The view of  the future  
here as elsewhere  in the  economic  sphere  is  clouded  with  significant  uncertainties.  With  
this  in mind,  I  nevertheless   try  my  hand  at  a  few  thoughts  on  the  direction  of 
change for product and service demands by users of the financial system and the implications of  
those  changes for applications  of mathematical  financial modeling.
The  household  sector  of  users  in  the  more  fully  developed  financial  sys- tems has 
experienced  a secular  trend of disaggregation in financial services. Some see this  trend 
continuing  with  existing  products such as mutual  funds being transported into technologically 
less-developed systems. Perhaps so, es- pecially  in  the  more  immediate  future,  with  the 
widespread  growth  of rela- tively inexpensive  Internet accessibility. However, deep and 
wide-ranging  dis- aggregation  has left households with the responsibility for making important 
and technically complex micro financial decisions involving risk  (such as de- tailed asset 
allocation and estimates of the optimal level of life-cycle saving for retirement)—decisions  that  
they  had  not  had  to  make  in  the  past,  are  not trained  to  make  in  the  present,  and 
are  unlikely  to  execute  efficiently  even with  attempts  at  education  in  the  future.  The  
low-cost  availability  of   the Internet does  not solve  the  “principal-agent” problem with  
respect  to finan- cial advice dispensed by an agent. That is why I believe that the trend will 
shift toward  more  integrated  financial  products  and services, which  are  easier  to 
understand and more tailored toward individual profiles. Those products and services will  include  
not only  the  traditional  attempt  to achieve  an  efficient risk-return tradeoff for the 
tangible-wealth portfolio but will also integrate hu- man-capital considerations, hedging, and 
income and estate tax planning in- to  the  asset-allocation  decisions.  Beyond  the  advisory  
role, financial  service providers  will  undertake  a role  of  principal  to  create  financial  
instruments that eliminate  “short-fall” or “basis” risk for households with respect to target-

"  During the last 25 years, finance theory has been a good predictor of future changes in finance 
practice.  That  is, when  theory  seems  to suggest  that  something  “should  be  there” and  it 
isn't, practice has evolved so that it is. The “pure” securities developed by Kenneth J. Arrow 
(1953)  that so clearly explain  the theoretical function of financial instruments in risk bearing 
were nowhere to be found in  the real world until the broad development  of the options and 
derivative-security markets. It is now routine for financial engineers  to disaggregate  the cash  
flows of various  secu- rities into their elemental Arrow-security component parts and then  to 
reaggregate  them  to cre- ate securities with  new patterns of cash flows. For the relation  
between options and Arrow secu- rities  and  the  application  of  the  Black-Scholes  model  to  
the  synthesis  and  pricing  of  Arrow securities, see Ross  (1976b) , Rolf W. Banz and Miller  
(1978) , Breeden and Robert Litzenberger (1978), Darrell J.  Duffie and Chi-fu Huang  (1986) , and 
Merton  (1992, pp. 44M50) .

Robert  C.  Merton                                                111

ed financial goals such as tuition for children's higher education and desired 
consumption-smoothing   throughout   the   life-cycle    (e.g.,   preserving   the household's  
standard  of  living  in  retirement,  cf., Franco  Modigliani,  1986) . The creation of such 
customized financial instruments will be made econom- ically feasible  by  the  derivative-security 
pricing  technology  that  permits  the construction  of  custom  products  at  
“assembly-line”-levels of  cost.  Paradoxi- cally,  making  the products  more user-friendly and 
simpler  to understand for customers  will  create  considerably  more  complexity  for  the  
producers  of those products. Hence, financial-engineering creativity and the technological and  
transactional  bases  to  implement  that creativity,  reliably  and  cost-effec- tively, are 
likely to become a central competitive element in the industry. The resulting complexity will 
require more elaborate and highly quantitative  risk- management  systems  within  financial  
service  firms  and  a  parallel  need  for more sophisticated approaches to government oversight. 
Neither of these can be  achieved  without  greater  reliance  on  mathematical  financial  
modeling, which  in  turn  will  be  feasible  only with  continued  improvements  in  the  so- 
phistication  and accuracy of financial models.
Non-financial firms currently use derivative securities and other contractu- al agreements  to  
hedge  interest rate, currency,  commodity,  and  even  equity price  risks. With  improved  
lower-cost  technology  and learning-curve experi- ence,  this  practice  is  likely  to  expand.  
Eventually,  this  alternative  to  equity capital  as a cushion  for risk could lead to a major 
change of corporate  struc- tures  as  more  firms  use  hedging  to  substitute  for  equity  
capital;  thereby moving from publicly traded shares to closely-held private shares.
The preceding section provides examples of current applications of the op- tions  technology  to 
corporate  project evaluation:  the evaluation  of research- and-development projects  in  
pharmaceuticals and  the value  of  flexibility  in the decision about sequel production  in the 
movie industry. The big potential shift in the future, however, is from tactical applications  of 
derivatives to stra- tegic ones.’° For example, a hypothetical oil company with crude oil reserves 
and  gasoline  and  heating-oil  distribution   but  no  refining  capability  could complete  the 
vertical integration  of the firm by using contractual agreements instead of physical  acquisition  
of a refinery.  Thus,  by entering  into contracts that call for  the  delivery  of  crude  oil  by 
the firm  on  one  date  in  return  for receiving  a mix  of  refined  petroleum  products  at a 
pre-specified  later  date, the firm in effect creates a synthetic  refinery. Real-world strategic  
examples in natural  gas  and  electricity  are  described  in  Harvard  Business  School  case 
studies,   “Enron   Gas   Services”   (1994)   and   “Tennessee   Valley   Authority: Option   
Purchase  Agreements”   ( 1996) ,   by  Peter   Tufano.   There   is  some evidence that these new 
financial technologies  may even lead to a revisiting of the industrial-organization model for 
these industries.
It is no coincidence  that the early strategic applications  are in energy- and power-generation 
industries that need long-term planning horizons and have

" See Kester  (1984) , Stewart C. Myers (1984) , and   Edward H. Bowman and  Dileep Hurry (1993) on 
 the application  of option-pricing theory  to the evaluation of strategic decisions.

112                                      Economic  Sciences  1992

major fixed-cost  components  on a large scale with considerable  uncertainty. Since energy and 
power generation  are fundamental  in every economy,  this use for derivatives  offers mainline  
applications  in both developed  and devel- oping  countries.  Eventually,  such  use  of  
derivatives  may  become  standard tools for implementing  strategic  objectives.
A  major  requirement  for  the  efficient  broad-based  application  of  these contracting  
technologies  in  both  the  household  and  non-financial-firm sec- tors will  be  to  find  
effective  organizational  structures  for  ensuring  contract performance,  which  includes  
global  clarification  and  revisions  of the  treat- ment of such contractual agreements in 
bankruptcy. The need for assurances on contract performance  is likely to stimulate further 
development  of the fi- nancial-guarantee  business  for  financial  institutions.  Such  
institutions  will have to improve the efficiency of collateral management further as assurance for 
performance. As we have seen, one early application of the option-pricing model focuses directly on 
the valuation and risk-exposure  measurement of fi- nancial guarantees.
A consequence of all this prospective  technological  change will be the need for  greater  
analytical  understanding  of  valuation  and  risk  management  by users,  producers,  and  
regulators  of  derivative  securities.  Furthermore,  im- provements  in efficiency from 
derivative products will not be effectively realiz- ed without  concurrent  changes  in  the 
financial  “infrastructure”—the  institu- tional  interfaces  between  intermediaries  and  
financial  markets,  regulatory practices,  organization  of  trading,  clearing,  settlement,  
other  back-office  fa- cilities,  and  management-information  systems.  To  perform  its  
functions  as both  user and overseer  of  the  financial  system,  government will  need  to in- 
novate and make use of derivative-security technology in the provision of risk- accounting 
standards, designing  monetary and fiscal policies,  implementing stabilization  programs, and 
overseeing financial-system regulation.
In summary,  in  the distant past, applications  of mathematical  models  had only limited and 
sidestream effects on finance practice. But in the last quarter century since the publication of 
the Black-Scholes option-pricing theory, such models have become mainstream  to practitioners in 
financial institutions and markets  around  the  world.  The  option-pricing  model  has  played  
an  active role in that transformation. It is safe to say that mathematical  models will play an 
indispensable  role in the functioning of the global financial system.
Even  this  brief discourse  on  the application  to finance  practice  of mathe- matical  models 
in general and the option-pricing model in particular would be negligently incomplete  without a 
strong word of  caution  about  their use. At times we can  lose sight of  the ultimate purpose  of 
the models when  their mathematics  become  too  interesting.  The  mathematics  of  financial  
models can  be applied precisely,  but the models are not at all precise  in  their appli- cation 
to the complex real world. Their accuracy as a useful approximation  to that world  varies  
significantly  across  time  and  place.  The  models  should  be applied  in  practice  only  
tentatively,  with  careful  assessment  of  their  limita- tions in each application.

Robert  C.  Merton                                               113
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Anderson,  James  E.  “Quotas  as  Options:  Optimality  and  Quota  License  Pricing  Under 
Uncertainty,”Journal of International Economics, August 1987,  23 (1—2), pp. 21—39.
Arrow,  Kenneth J.  “Le role des valeurs  boursiéres  pour  la répartition  la meilleure  des ris- 
ques,”  Econometrie,   Co1loques   Internationaux  du  Centre   National   de   la  Recherche 
Scientifique,  1953, Vol. XI, Paris, pp. 41—7.
Bachelier,  Louis.  ‘Théorie  de  la Spéculation,”  Annales  Science  de  l'Ecole Normale  
Supérieure, Paris: Gauthier-Villars, 1900  (3) No. 1018.  (English  translation  in Cootner, P.H., 
ed. The Random Character of Stock Market Prices,  Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1964, pp. 17—78.)
Baldwin,  Carliss.  “Pricing  Convertible  Preferred  Stock According  to the  Rational  Option 
Pricing  Theory,”  B.S.  dissertation,  Massachusetts  Institute  of Technology,  Cambridge, MA, 
1972.
Baldwin,   Carliss   and  Clark,   Kim.  Design  Rules:   The   Power   of   Modulari!},   
forthcoming, Cambridge,  MA: MIT Press, 1999 (forthcoming).
Baldwin, Carliss, Lessard, Donald and Mason, Scott P. “Budgetary Time Bombs: Controlling Government 
Loan Guarantees,”  Canadian Public Policy,  1983,  9, pp. 338—346.
Banz, Rolf W. and Miller,  Merton  H. “Prices for State-Contingent Claims: Some Estimates and 
Applications,"Journal of Business,  October 1978, II   (4), pp. 653—72.
Bernstein, Peter L.  Co§ita/ Ideas:  The Improbable  Origins ofModern Wall Street,  New York: Free 
Press, 1992.
Bertsimas,  Dimitris,  Kogan,  Leonid  and  Lo, Andrew  W.  “Pricing  and Hedging  Derivative 
Securities   in   Incomplete    Markets:   An   e-Arbitrage   Approach,”   Sloan   School   of 
Management,  Massachusetts Institute of Technology Working Paper #LFE-I027—97, June 1997.
Black,   Fischer.   “How   We   Came   Up  With   the   Option   Formula,”  /ournni  of   Portfolio 
Management,  Winter 1989,  IN  (2), pp. 4—8. Originally, distributed  in two parts by Fischer 
Black's  pricing  and  commentary  service  on  options,  Options,  Vol.  1,  No.  10, June  21, 
1976; Vol. 1, No. 11, July 5, 1976.
-.  “Interest Rates as Options,”Journal ofFinarice,  December  1995,: 50 (5), pp. 1371—1376. Black, 
 Fischer  and  Scholes,  Myron  S.  “The  Valuation  of  Option  Contracts  and  a Test  of
Market Efficiency,”Journal ofFinance,  May 1972,  27 M) , pp. 399-418.
—.  “The Pricing oY Options and Corporate Liabilities,"Journal of Political Economy, May—June 1973, 
 81 (3), pp. 637—54.
Blanton, William ).  “Reducing  the Value of  Plaintiff s Litigation  Option  in  Federal  Court: 
Daubert  v.  Merrell  Dow  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc.,”               Mason  University   Low  his, 
Spring 1995,  2, pp. 159—222.
Bodie,  Zvi.  ‘that the Pension  Benefit Guaranty Corporation  Can  Learn from the Federal 
Savings-and-Loan  Insurance  Corporation,” Journal ofFinancial  Services  Research, January 1996,  
10 (1), pp. 83-100.
Bodie,  Zvi  and  Merton,  Robert  C.  ‘the  Informational  Role  of  Asset  Prices:  The  Case  of 
Implied Volatility,” Chapter 6 in Dwight B. Crane et al, 1995, pp. 197—224.
-.   Finance,   Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice  Hall, 1998.
Bodie,  Zvi,  Merton,  Robert  C.  and  Samuelson,  William  F.  “Labor  Supply  Flexibility  and 
Portfolio   Choice   in   a  Life-Cycle   Model,”  Journal   of  Economic   Dynamics   and   
Control, July—october  1992, 16 (3,4), pp. 427—449.
Bowman,   Edward   H.   and   Hurry,   Dileep.   “Strategy   Through   the   Option   Lens:   An 
Integrated View of  Resource Investments  and the Incremental-Choice Process,” Academy of 
Management  his, October 1993,  18 (4), pp. 768-82.
Breeden, Douglas T. “An Intertemporal Asset Pricing Model with Stochastic  Consumption and 
Investment Opportunities,”journal ofFinancial Economic:s,  September  1979,  7 (3) pp. 265—96.
—. “Futures  Markets  and   Commodity  Options:  Hedging  and  Optimality  in  Incomplete 
Markets,"/ourziof ofEconomic Theory, April 1984, 52 (2), pp. 275—300.

114                                        Economic  Sciences  1997

Breeden, Douglas T. and Litzenberger,  Robert. “Prices of State-Contingent Claims Implicit in 
Option Prices,”Journal of Business,  October 1978, 51 (4), pp. 621—51.
Brennan,   Michael  J.   and   Schwartz,   Eduardo   S.   ‘the  Pricing   of  Equity—Linked   Life 
Insurance  Policies with  an Asset Value  Guarantee,” Journal  of Financial Economics, June 1976 I  
(3) pp. 19a-213.
—.  “Evaluating  Natural  Resource  Investments,” Journal o/ Business,  April  1985a,  58  (2), pp.
I3W57.
—, “Determinants  of GNMA  Mortgage  Prices,” journal  of  the  American Tal    Estate  U    Urban 
Economics  Association,  Fall 1985b,  13 (3) , pp. 209—28.
Chiang,   Raymond,   Lai,  Tsong-Yue  and  Ling,  David  C.  “Retail  Leasehold   Interests:  A 
Contingent   Claim   Analysis,”  Journal   of   the   American   Real  Estate   H    Urban  
Economics Association,  Summer 1986,  14  (2), pp. 21d—29.
Constantinides,  George  M.  and  Ingersoll,  jonathan  E., Jr.  “Optimal  Bond  Trading  with 
Personal Taxes,”Journal o/fziioacia/  Economics,  September,  1984,  13 (3), pp. 299—336.
Cox, John  C. and  Ross,  Stephen  A.  ‘The Valuation  of Options  for Alternative  Stochastic 
Processes,”Journal ofFinancial Economics, January-March  1976, I  (1/ 2), pp. 145—66.
Cox, John C. and Rubinstein, Mark.  ations Markets.  Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1985.
Crane, Dwight B., Froot, Kenneth A., Mason, Scott P., Perold, André F., Merton, Robert C., Bodie,  
Zvi,  Sirri,  Erik  R.  and  Tufano,  Peter.  The  Gfobaf Financial  System:  A  Functional 
P‹:rspective,  Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1995.
Cummins,  J.   David.  “Risk-Based  Premiums  for  Insurance  Guarantee  Funds,”  Journal  of 
Finance, September 1988,  #J  (4) , pp. 823—89.
Cummins, J.  David and Geman, Hélyette. “Pricing Catastrophe  Insurance Futures and Call Spreads: 
An Arbitrage Approach,”Journal ofFixed Income,  March  1995,  4 (4) pp. 46—57.
Cunningham,   Donald  F,  and  Hendershott,   Patric  H.  “Pricing  FHA  Mortgage  Default 
Insurance,” Housing Finance his, December 1984, I  (4) , pp. 373—92.
Davis,  Mark  H.A.  “Option  Pricing  in  Incomplete  Markets,”  in  M.A.H.  Dempster  and  S. 
Pliska,  eds.,  Mathematics  of Derivative  Securities,  Cambridge:  Cambridge  University  Press: 
1997, pp. 216—226.
Dixit, Avinash  K. and Pindyck, Robert S. Investment  UnderUncertainty,  Princeton: Princeton 
University Press,  1994.
Doherty, Neil A. and Garven, James R. “Price Regulation  in Property-Liability Insurance: A 
Contingent-Claims Approach,"Journal ofFinance,  December  1986,  #i  (5), pp. 1031—50.
Dothan,  Uri and Williams, Joseph.  “Education  as an  Option,” Journal  of Business, January 1981, 
54 (1), pp.  I 17—39.
Duffie,   Darrell   J.   and   Huang,   Chi-fu.   “Implementing   Arrow-Debreu   Equilibria   by 
Continuous  Trading  of  a Few  Long-Lived  Securities,”  Econometria,  November  1986,  SJ (6), 
pp. 1337—56.
Dunn,   Kenneth   B.   and   McConnell,   John  J.   ‘Valuation   of  GNMA   Mortgage-Backed 
Securities,”journal ofFinance, June 1981, 56 (3), pp. 599—616.
Faulkner,   Terrance   W.   “Applying   ‘Options  Thinking’   to  R  &  D  Valuation,”   Research- 
Technology  Management,  May-June  1996, 39 (3), pp. 50—56.
Figlewski, Stephen. “Options Arbitrage in Imperfect Markets,"Journal ofFinance, December 1989,  44 
(5), pp. 1289—1311.
Ffillmer, Hans and Sondermann,  Dieter. “Hedging of Non-Redundant Contingent-Claims,” in  Werner  
Hildenbrand  and  Andreau   Mas-Co1e11,   eds.,   Contributions   to  Mathematical Economics,  in  
Honor of Cérard De6reu, Amsterdam: North  Holland, 1986, pp. 205-223.
Gatto, Mary Ann, Geske, Robert, Litzenberger, Robert and Sosin, Howard B. “Mutual Fund 
Insurance,”Journal ofFinancial Economics,  September  1980, 8 (3), pp. 283-317.
Geltner, David and Wheaton, William C. “On the Use of the Financial  Option Price Model to Value  
and  Explain  Vacant  Urban  Land,” Journal  of  the  American  Real Estate  H   Urban Economics  
Association,  Summer 1989,  17 (2), pp. 142—58.
Goldman, M. Barry, Sosin, Howard B. and Shepp, Lawrence A. “On Contingent Claims that

Robert  C. Merton                                              115

Insure Ex-Post Optimal Stock Market Timing,”/ouriinf ofFinance,  (May 1979,  J4  (2), pp. 401—13.
Hamlett, Cathy A. and Baumel, C. Phillip.  “Rural  Road Abandonment:  Policy Criteria and Empirical 
Analysis,”  American Journal ofA gricultural Economics,  February 1990,  72 (1) pp. 114-20.
Harrington,  Scott  E.,  Mann,  Steven  V.  and  Niehaus,  Greg.  “Insurer  Capital  Structure 
Decisions  and  the  Viability  of  Insurance   Derivatives,”  Journal  of  Risk   and  Insurance, 
September  1995, 62 (3), pp. 483—508.
Hawkins,  Gregory  D.  “An  Analysis  of Revolving  Credit  Agreements,”  Journal  of Financial
Economic,  March  1982,  i0  (1) , pp. 59—82.
Hayes, James A., Cole, Joseph  B. and Meiselman,  David  I.  “Health  Insurance  Derivatives: The  
Newest  Application  of  Modern  Financial  Risk  Management,”  Business  Economics, April 1993,  
28 (2), pp. 3€›-40.
He, Hua and Pindyck, Robert,  S. “Investments  in Flexible  Production  Capacity,”Bourne/ of 
Economic Dynamics  and  Control, July—October  1992, 16 (3.4), pp. 575—99.
Ingersoll, Jonathan  E., Jr.  “A Theoretical  Model  and Empirical  Investigation  of the  Dual 
Purpose  Funds:  An  Application   of  Contingent-Claims  Analysis,”  /ournof  of  Financial 
Economics, January—March  1976, I  (1/2), pp. 82—123.
Itfi, Kiyoshi.  Kiyoshi Itâ Selected Papers, New York: Springer-Verlag, 1987.
Jarrow,  Robert A.  and  Rudd, Andrew T.  Option Pricing,  Homewood,  IL: Richard  D.  Irwin 1983.
Jin, Li, Kogan, Leonid, Lim, Terence, Taylor, jonathan and Lo, Andrew W. 'the Derivatives 
Sourcebook:   A  Bibliography   of  Applications   of   the   Black-Scholes/Merton  Option- Pricing 
 Model,”  Sloan  School  of  Management,  Massachusetts  Institute  of Technology Working Paper, 
(forthcoming) .
Jones,  E.  Philip,  Mason,  Scott  P.,  Rosenfeld,  Eric  E.  and  Fisher,  Lawrence.  “Conungent 
Claims Analysis of  Corporate  Capital  Structures:  An  Empirical  Investigation,” Jotirno/ o/ 
Finance, July 1984 39 (3) , pp. 611—ñ25.
Kang,  Taehoon  and  Brorsen,  B.  Wade.   ‘Valuing  Target  Price  Support  Programs  with Average 
 Option  Pricing,”  American  Journal  of  AgNcultural  Economics,  February  1995,  77 (1), pp. 
106—118.
Karpoff,   Jonathan   M.   “Characteristics   of   Limited   Entry   Fisheries   and   the   Option 
Component of Entry Licenses,” Land Economic:s,  November  1989, 65 (4), pp. 38b-393.
Kester,  W.  Carl.   ‘Today’s  Options  for  Tomorrow's   Growth,”  Harvard   Business   his, 
March—April  1984,  62 (2), pp. 153—60.
Kraus,  Alan  and  Ross,  Stephen  A.  ‘The  Determination  of Fair  Profits  for  the  Property- 
Liability Insurance Firm,"courtier ofFinance,  September 1982, 3'7 (4), pp. 1015—28.
Kupiec,  Paul  H.  and  White,  A.  Patricia.  “Regulatory  Competition  and  the  Efficiency  of 
Alternative Derivative Product Margining Systems,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series, Board  
of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,Washington,  DC,  February  1996, 96/11.
Leonard,  Roger J.  “An  Empirical  Examination  of  a New  General  Equilibrium  Model  for 
Warrant Pricing,” M.S. thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,  September  1971. Leslie, 
Keith J.  and Michaels, Max P. ‘the Real Power of Real Options,” Mcfimey  QtinrferiJ,
1997, 2 (3), pp. 4-22.
Long, John B. “Discussion,”Journal ofFiriance, May 1974,  29 (2), pp. 485-8.
Luehrman,  Timothy A. “Arundel  Partners: The Sequel Project,” Harvard Business School Case #9 
292-140,  1992.
Magiera,  Frank  T.  and  McLean,  Robert  A.  “Strategic  Options  in  Capital  Budgeting  and 
Program  Selection  under  Fee-for-Service and  Managed  Care,” Health  Care Management his, Fall 
1996,  21 (4) , pp. 7—17.
Mahoney,  Paul  G.  “Contract  Remedies  and  Options  Pricing,”  Journal  of  Legal  Studies,
January 1995,  24 (1), pp. 139—63.
Majd,  Saman  and  Pindyck,  Robert  S.  ‘Time  to  Build,  Option  Value,  and  Investment 
Decisions,"mourner ofFinancial Economics,  March  1987,  18 (1), pp. 7—28.

116                 Economic  Sciences  1997

Marcus, Alan J.  “Corporate Pension Policy and the Value of PBGC Insurance,” in Zvi Bodie, john   
B.  Shoven,  and  David  A.  Wise,  eds.,  Issves   iii  Pension  Economics,   Chicago,  IL: 
University of Chicago Press, 1987, pp. 49-76.
Mason,  Scott  P.  and  Merton,  Robert  C.  ‘the  Role  of  Contingent   Claims  Analysis  in 
Corporate Finance,” in Edward Altman and Marti Subrahmanyan,  eds., Scent Advances  in Corporate 
Finance,  Homewood,  IL: Richard D. Irwin, 1985, pp. 7—54.
McLaughlin,   Robyn   and  Taggart,   Robert  A.  “The  Opportunity  Cost  of  Using  Excess 
Capacity,” Financial Management,  Summer 1992,  21 (2), pp. 12—23.
McDonald, John  G. “Faculty Tenure  as a Put Option: An Economic  Interpretation,” Social Science  
QttorterfJ,  September  1974, US  (2) , pp. 362—71.
McDonald, Robert L. and Siegel, Daniel R. “Investment  and the Valuation  of Firms When There is an 
Opuon  to Shut Down,” International Economic     n'is, June 1985,  26 (2) , pp. 331—49.
Merton, Robert C. “Lifetime Portfolio Selection  Under Uncertainty: The Continuous-Time Case,”  his 
       of Economics  and  Statistics,  August  1969,  51  (3) ,  pp.  247—57.  Reprinted  in Merton 
 (1992, Ch. 4) .
-.  “A Dynamic  General Equilibrium  Model  of  the Asset Market and its Application  to  the 
Pricing  of  the  Capital  Structure  of  the  Firm.”  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology 
Working Paper No. 497-70, 1970. Reprinted in Merton  (1992, Ch. 11).
—.  “Optimum  Consumption  and  Portfolio  Rules  in  a Continuou>Time Model,” /ournnf  of Economic 
Theory,  December 1971, 5 (4) , pp. 37       13. Reprinted in Merton  (1992, Ch. 5) .
—.  “Appendix:  Continuou+Time  Speculative  Processes,”  in  R.H.  Day and  S.M.  Robinson, eds., 
Mathematical Topics in Economic Theory and Computation,  Philadelphia, PA: Society for Industrial 
and Applied Mathematics,  1972. Reprinted in SIAM Review, January 1973,  JS (1), pp. 34-38.
-.  ‘Theory  of Rational  Option  Pricing,"  Bell Journal  of Economics  and  Management   Science, 
Spring  1973a,  4 (1), pp.  141—83.  Reprinted  in Merton  (1992, Ch. 8).  Original  Working Paper  
f574-71,  Sloan  School  of  Management,  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology, Cambridge,  MA 
(October 1971) .
—. “An Intertemporal  Capital Asset Pricing Model,” Econometrica,  September  1973b,  41 (5), pp. 
867—87. Reprinted in Merton  (1992, Ch.  l5).
—. “On  the  Pricing  of  Corporate  Debt:  The  Risk  Structure  of Interest  Rates,”  Journal  of 
Finance,  May 1974,  29 (2), pp. 449—70. Reprinted in Merton  (1992, Ch. 12).
—.  “Option Pricing When Underlying Stock Returns are Discontinuous,"Journal ofFinancial Economics, 
January—March  1976a, I  N/2), pp. 12a-44. Reprinted in Merton  (1992, Ch. 9).
—.  “The  Impact  on  Option  Pricing  of Specification  Error  in  the  Underlying  Stock  Price 
Returns,"/ourno/ ofFinarice,  May 1976b, II   (2), pp. 33W50.
—.  “An  Analytic  Derivation  of  the  Cost  of  Deposit  Insurance  and  Loan  Guarantees:  An 
Application  of  Modern  Option  Pricing  Theory,” /ourtznf   of  Bashing  and  Finance,  June 
1977a,  1 (1), pp. All. Reprinted  in Merton  (1992, Ch. 19).
—.  “On  the  Pricing  of Contingent  Claims  and  the  Modigliani-Miller  Theorem,” Journal  of 
Financial Economics,  November  1977b, 5 (3) , pp. 241—9. Reprinted in Merton  (1992, Ch. 13).
-.  “Financial  Economics,” in E.C.  Brown  and R.M. Solow,  eds., Paul  Samuelson  and  Modern 
Economic  Theory,  New York: McGraw-Hill,  1983, pp. 1 OU    40.
-.  Continuous-Time Finance,  Revised Edition, Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwell,  1992.
—. “Operation  and  Regulation  in  Financial  Intermediation: A Functional  Perspective,”  in 
Peter   Englund,   ed.,   Operation  and   &gufntioii   o/ Financial   Markets,   Stockholm:   The 
Economic Council, 1993, pp. 17—67.
—.  “Influence  of Mathematical  Models  in  Finance  on  Practice:  Past,  Present  and Future,”
Philasophical  Transactions of the Rgfal Society ofWridon, June 1994, 547   1684) , pp. 451—463.
—.  “Financial  Innovation  and  the  Management  and  Regulation  of  Financial  Institutions,”
Journal of Banking and Finance, June 1995,  19 (3,4), pp. 461—481.
—.  “A   Model   of   Contract   Guarantees   for   Credit-Sensitive,   Opaque   Financial   Inter- 
mediaries,” European Finance his, 1997a,  1 (1) , pp. 1—13.

Robert  C.  Merton                                                117

—. “On   the  Role  of  the  Wiener  Process  in  Finance  Theory  and  Practice:  The  Case  of 
Replicating  Portfolios,”  in  David Jerison,  I.M. Singer,  and  Daniel  W. Stroock,  eds.,  The 
Legacy  of  Norbert  lViener:  A  Centennial  Symposium,  PSPM  Series,  Vol.  60,  Providence,  
RI: American  Mathematical Society, 1997b, pp. 209—221.
Merton,   Robert   C.  and   Bodie,   Zvi.   “On   the   Management   of  Financial   Guarantees,”
Financial Management, Winter 1992, 21 (4), pp. 87—109.
Merton,  Robert  C.  and  Scholes,  Myron  S.  “Fischer  Black,” Journal  of Finance, December 
1995, 50 (5), pp. 1359—1370.
Merton,  Robert C., Scholes,  Myron S. and  Gladstein,  Mathew L. “The Returns and  Risk of 
Alternative  Call  Option  Portfolio  Investment Strategies,”/ourna/ of Business, April  1978, II   
(2), pp. 18a-242.
-.  ‘the  Returns  and  Risks  of  Alternative   Put-Option   Portfolio  Investment  Strategies,”
Journal of Business, January 1982, US  (1), pp. 1—55.
Merton,  Samantha  J.  “Options  Pricing  in  the  Real  World  of  Uncertainties:  Educating 
Towards  a  Flexible   Labor  Force,”   B.A.   thesis,   Department   of  Economics,   Harvard 
University,  March 18, 1992.
Miller, Merton H. Merton Miller on Derivatives, New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1997. Miller, 
Stephen  E. “Economics  of Automobile  Leasing: The  Call Option Value,”Journal of
Consumer Affairs, Summer 1995, 29 (1) , pp.  199—218.
Modigliani, Franco. “Life Cycle, Individual Thrift and  the Wealth of Nations,” As f•ñx Nobel 1985, 
Stockholm:  Nobel Foundation, 1986.
Mody,   Ashoka.   ‘Valuing   and   Accounting   for   Loan   Guarantees,"   World   Bank   Research
Of›sereer, 1996, 11 (1), pp.l19—42.
Myers,  Stewart  C.  “Finance  Theory  and  Financial  Strategy,”  Interfaces, January—February 
1984,  14 (1), pp. 126—37.
Nasar, Sylvia.  “For Fed, a New Set of Tea Leaves,”  New York Times, 5July 1992, sec. D:1. Neal,  
Robert  S.  “Credit  Derivatives:  New  Financial  Instruments  for  Controlling  Credit
Risk,” Economic his, (Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City), Second Q_uarter 1996,  81
(2), pp.15—27.
Nichols, Nancy A. “Scientific Management at Merck: An Interview with CFO Judy Lewent,”
Harvard  Business his,January—February 1994,  72 (1) , pp.  89—99.
O'Flaherty,  Brendan.  ‘the  Option  Value  of  Tax  Delinquency:  Theory,” Journal  of  Urban 
Economics, November 1990, 28 (3), pp. 287—317.
Paddock, James L., Siegel,  Daniel  R. and  Smith, James L. “Option Valuation  of Claims on Real  
Assets:  The   Case  of  Offshore  Petroleum  Leases,”  Qyarterl   Journal  of  Economics, August 
1988,  103 (3) , pp.  479—508.
Perold,  André  F.  “BEA  Associates:   Enhanced   Equity  Index  Funds,”  Harvard   Business 
School Case #29a-024, 1992.
—. “The Payment System  and  Derivative  Instruments,”  Chapter  2 in Crane et al. 1995,  pp. 
33—79.
Romano,   Marc  and   Touzi,  Nizar.   “Contingent  Claims  and   Market  Completeness   in  a 
Stochastic Volatility  Model,”  Mathematical Finance, October 1997,  7 (4  ), pp. 399—412.
Rosenfeld,  Eric.  Stochastic Processes of Common Stock Returns: An Empirical Examination, Ph.D. 
dissertation,   Sloan   School   of   Management,   Massachusetts   Institute   of  Technology, 
Cambridge,  MA, 1980.
Ross,  Stephen  A.  “Arbitrage  Theory  of  Capital  Asset  Pricing,” Journal  of Economic  Theory,
December 1976a,  7J  (3), pp. 341—60.
—. “Options  and   Efficiency,”  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  February  1976b,   9O  (l  ) , 
 pp.
7W89.
Samuelson,  Paul  A.  “Rational  Theory  of  Warrant  Pricing,”  Industrial  Management     e  im, 
Spring 1965, 6 (2), pp. 13—31.
—. “Mathematics  of Speculative  Price,” in  R.H.  Day and  S.M.  Robinson,  eds.,  Mathematical 
Topics  in Economic  Theory  and  Coin§utotion,  Philadelphia,  PA:  Society  for  Industrial  and 
Applied  Mathematics, 1972. Reprinted in  SIAM View', January 1973,  JS (1), pp. 1—42.
Samuelson,  Paul  A.  and   Merton  Robert  C.  “A  Complete  Model  of  Warrant  Pricing  that

118                                     Economic  Sciences  1997

Maximizes   Utility,”   Industrial   Management   his,  Winter   1969.   10   (2),   pp.   17—46. 
Reprinted in Merton  (1992, Ch. 7).
Scholes,  Myron  S. ‘Taxes and the Pricing of Options,”  ;fnurno/  o/Fitioiice,  May 1976, NJ  (2), 
pp. 319—32.
—. “Derivatives   in   a   Dynamic   Environment,”   As   Prin   Nobel   1997,   Stockholm:   Nobel 
Foundation,  1998.
Scholes,  Myron  S. and Wolfson,  Mark A.  Taxes  and  Business  Strategy:  A Planning Approach,
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1992.
Smetters,  Kenneth.  “Investing   the  Social  Security  Trust  Fund  in  Equities:  An  Option 
Pricing  Approach,”  Technical  Paper   Series,   Macroeconomic   Analysis  and  Tax  Analysis 
Divisions, Washington,  DC., 1997.
Smith,   Clifford   W.,  jr.    “Option   Pricing:   A   Review,”   Journal   of   fiaaricini   
Economics,
January—March  1976,  5 ( 1/2) , pp. M52.
Smith,  V.  Kerry.  “A  Bound  for  Option  Value,”  Land  Economics,  August  1984,  60  (3) ,  
pp.
292—6.
Sosin, Howard B. “On the Valuation  of Federal Loan Guarantees  to Corporations,”;foitrtio/
ofFinance,  December  1980,  35  (5), pp. 1209—21.
Stratonovich,  R.L.  Conditional  Markov  Processes  and  Their Application to the Theos    of 
Optimal Control, New York: American Elsevier,  1968.
Stulz,  Rene  M.  “Options  on  the  Minimum  or the  Maximum  of  Two  Risky Assets:  Analysis and 
Applications,”Journal ofFinancial Economits, July 1982,  10 (2), pp. 161—85.
Terry,   Charles   T.   “Option   Pricing   Theory   and   the   Economic   Incentive   Analysis   
of Nonrecourse Acquisition  Liabilities,” American Journal of Tax Polio, Fall 1995,  12 (2), pp. 
2’7W397.
Triantis,  Alexander J.  and  Hodder, James  E.  ‘Valuing  Flexibility  as  a  Complex  Option," 
Journal of Finance, June 1990, 45 (2) , pp. 549—65.
Trigeorgis,  Lenos.  “Real  Options  and  Interactions  with  Financial  Flexibility,”  Financial 
Management,  Autumn  1993,  22 (3) , pp. 202—24.
-.   Real Options,  Cambridge,  MA: The MIT Press,  1996.
Tufano, Peter. “Enron  Gas Services,” Harvard Business School Case #294-051,  1994.
—  'Tennessee  Valley Authority:  Option  Purchase  Agreements,"  Harvard  Business  School Case 
#296—038, 1996.
Turvey, Calum G, and Amanor-Boadu, Vincent.  “Evaluating Premiums for a Farm Income Insurance   
Policy,”   Canadian  Journal   of  Agricultural  Economics,  July  1989,  17   (2) ,  pp. 23S-47.
Wiggins,  james  B.  “Option  Values  Under  Stochastic  Volatility:   Theory  and  Empirical 
Estimates,"journal ofFinancial Economics,  December  1987,  19 (2), pp. 351—72.
Williams, Joseph  T.  “Rea1 Estate  Development  as an  Option,”Bourne/ of Real Estate Finance ord 
Economics, June 1991,  9 (2), pp. 191—208.
Zinkhan,  F.  Christian.  “Option-Pricing  and  Timberland's  Land-Use  Conversion  Option,”
Land Economics, August 1991,  67 (3) , pp. 317—325.
