PRIZE LECTURES ON WILLIAM VICKREY
Procuring Universal Service: Putting Auction Theory  to Work
Lecture at the  Rojml S\scdisfi  Academy of  Sciences,  Dc‹:cmI›cr  9,  1996



Stanford Uni•<zsiiy, Gnliforni*.  USA.



I fist mets\’iIIiam Yick   'F in Nariua Aizyort outside ToLjro in 1992. He  w  on his  way  back  
to  d e  U»itccl  States  From  Chins,  wT cre,  in  lypica)  Vickrcy biT\ion,  ht was eyeing nacl 
rhcorcfical  id*a ‹a adfisc a government about irs economic  policy,  hoping  to make life better  
for large  nttmbcrs  oF people.  I took die chance  to approach  him and introduce  moult. Soon, we 
were e»- gaged in a spiri\cctiFzaflicronc-rided discussion ahot t the lik  !r e*  ‹U•• • • of some 
o£! is proposed yol‹c‹cs for Cl  inn.
DespiteVick•r'• •‹  »•• I»‹e•••›  •  y›acucaTapplications, it was his LrilTi• ant theoretical worL 
iJ at \Yas emphasized in the pri*citation-[›azticuIarJy his path-breaking iniuaiio» of ihc theory 
of auclions arid market design. We can
best fionor Vickzcy‘s memory  to‹Jay I›y putting llicse sbsttact theoretical idc• as  a use in rcsl 
und i npor‹8nt app}icacions. My goa) in  tt›is \cc«m is to show one way in  which tha\ migfit be 
done, with an application ‹a che problem of regulating end financing lntversal telephone  service," 
wh ch means nfFord- sbte bwic ‹c!ephonc  sorssce  Lor nearlf  c  ”erjonc.
I ha'rc organized this lecture in Yo»r par\s. The   first is a  rulcw ocdeon      idc-
as  nzroduccd ‹n V›ckrcy’s senH»a! papers st›o«t t!›c theory of nucuons. I use rhc term "auction" 
hroa‹Il}• to refer io  any inarI:ct  process in 1 'hich  ihe iden- iiries of ‹he buyers or se)icrs 
snd  che terms of  trade,  parucu\arid  including yrices, are dclcrmincd  b}' nn  explicit 
comparison  oF bids or olTcrs.  In par\i- c‹iIar, the rcrm onco›np:iss«s I›oti   "open auct  o»s" 
nnd "suslcd cinders." Tt›c second  part describes  the particular isst\eg  involved  i\\ 
implementing  uniwr- sal telephone service  in the United Stales, anlt Use kinds of  solutions rhat 
had been  pres  ously  proposed. Sim  lar Issues  aria  in    vcCy  econom câtly  dewl-
oped countrF. particularly    iM democrat ics, as \ ’elf as  i»  some ott\er incl‹istrics, such  as 
 die  clcciriciil  per       indiis     .  The  think  pitrt  xliox > hon  Vickrcy's kkm  and lhosc 
of his intellectual  descendants can be mid arc being need lo
generate new and ›opcrior alieniatiics for dealing math  these truce. The final part points out 
come of the remaining  limitations of the analysis.

VfCkREY  AND A£/CTION TI-IEORY
Btforc  turning our attention  in rite derails of Vic¥rey’s snabns of auctions, Jet us paHse for a 
n\omcnt  to admire the remarkable  concept bcl  incl deem. BeFozo Vickr    "s work, economic  
rhcoriz›ng  aboHt markcu absiractcd from lie   detailed rt ice that cterermine  who trades how 
mttcli ›dth whom snd  st w'hat price. In rite emiingi of clamic  I ecenomuts lihe Smiih and 
ittanhall and ncoclanical  Nobel laureates likn Samuelmn, mrs, them aad Debrcii, apa- ly is formed 
on the con‹litions of supply arid demand. It was these conditions, accor‹ling  to ncocIcss‹cal  
theorF, rhnt dccermino  market o«tcomeu Yhe the-
ory i nPTici‹1F asst\mcs cthat d     paztic»Jar rttles gaerning how bia   nncl oJTm
are con btncd to determine pncw and allocations \ ltimatcly has no efTect on market outcomes
Vickrcy's analyvii rvjetted  rims ienei ot ilie neoclassical  approach. Ii jnid deinilcti altcniion 
io the rtiles of the marltet and foio d ihai, ee neiimes, ihe 1‹n.cl of  prices, the quantities 
uadcA and ltte identities of  the trawlers cotild de- pend in important sva}s on these rt•lw 
Vickrcy's payers incl\tdc‹i d e Flzst for- mal analysis iuing ‹i›    rr  to duisc new auccion 
rti\cs to »akc efficim   out-
comes  mem   likely'.  Using  uhat  has  since  t›c«n  learnml  fro n  theoretical
anale anJlaboratory cxpcrit»cnis  chat tcs‹ akcr»at‹tc  mtce, we have be- coi»c  i›\creasing)y  
a‹lcpt  at  clesigziing  Ihe  rttles  of  markets  to uco›npIish vnnotrs ends. in pr‹rang 
‹trama«csll   o» older aHc‹ton  designs !n  the past iwo anal a half yenn in ilie United States, 
for exawlo, commercial licenses ve› rise  portions of  tltc  ruilio spectrum  for  new  services  
linvc  been  sold  using novel auction designs suggested by dieory and iesu d in economics  
laborato- ries. These attctions have been used on a large scale      cr  $90 liillion has been 
raiecd—and  led  iO B//âJnily  efficlNt  license  wigiiaieiitn  and  prices  ihat appear io rvflni 
satires fairly. The oulcames of these atictionx contrast sharp- 1}' snih the relaiixvty incfficieni 
 and low imerttie otttcoines obtained iii spec- tfiiatietioris in Hcw Zealand and Australia in 1990 
aiiil 199$.

along the petli iliat 1*ic1•rey  hitch in 1961  and upon which  iiiany have since Tire appropriate 
franicuort fpr a formaj analysis of alternatis< auction ioe-

ibat problem bf inirodttcing a tractablc clasi of game theoretical motels that are now khown cx 
modem;f'twig mfun iuoJefc these arc the ones iiiosi of-
ten Heed  to st‹i‹ly questions ‹n a‹icuo»  ‹heory.  lii I\is anal\srs,  Vickrc}• repre- scaieil 
rite bid‹lers’  tincerintniy aboiii one another's likvly bids by sHpponng that bitldcrs ‹lean 
random "xzlues” for ihe items being cold according  to some probability ‹Iistnl›‹•tion. TI›      
nnic  the‹r  And dcp<, ctcij‹ un   their xa]ues, will› ccnMr*n ie forces ‹lctcrn ining the Ies<ls 
of their T›ifls. 11c sttt‹lied mcral ctilTcrcnt  Formal  bi‹!‹iing  games  d  nri»g  ‹ho  clcn 
c,jrr jnst  describmt.  The gai»m ‹!iITcrcd in  ti e nt mbcr of goods ofFcml for sale. tfic 
discribt‹rion of bidder  sI‹ics, tho syt»t»c      or as.winned of he players' •alne distrib«ionx

and ihe rules of  the auction. All these  variañons were studied using what we would  not*  call    
               Nash pile, a  concept  that  was  first  Introduced and formalized  more than half a 
decade later in  the work of Nobel laureate John Harsanyi, and it was a full decade before olhers 
would begin to see how to apply these ideas to economic analyses
The main technical element of Vickrey's analysis, including especially ltte
independent private values model and Bayesian Nash equilibrium. are incor- porated into the 
analysis of the universal service problem given below.
Vickrey's  1961  paper  reported a  number  of results that  would  itltimalely prove  In  be very 
signiiicanu One-now  known  as  rite  mum      yiivnWn• IN rent-holds  that in certain 
environments,  wveral popular auciion mechanisms including  the ascending bid aitclion commonly 
used in English auction hour es,  the  descending  bid  Dutch  auction,  and  the  ordinary  paled  
vender  im- plement an efficient outcome and generate ltte same average receipts for ihe iller. At 
the time, this result might have seemed to suggest it realm '• the con- ditions of supply and 
demand, raiher than the details of the auction process, that  determine  market  outcomes.  On   
closer  examination,  however,  it also contains  lhe  seeds  of  another  insight,  namely,  ihat  
certain  objectives,  in- cluding efficiency of ltte alloc.ation  and alter revenue, can be 
maximized  by more than  one auction design, leaving freedom  for  tlte auction desngner  in 
accomplish  secondary objectives at  the same  time as maximizing revenue or efficiency-
Vickrey himself recognized  the importance of that insight. He showed  that
a new  auction  design  first  proposed  in that paper—a  sealed  lender in  v*hich lhe  highest  
bidder  receives  ihe  item  but  pays  a  price  equal  to  the  second highest bid—achieves the 
Anne efficiency as the other mechanisms but, unlike other kinds of auctions, also gives each bidder 
a d-n‹mz say       namely, to bid its own value. (A dominant strategy is a slralegy that is best 
for the bidder regardless of the strategies of the other bidders.)
Vickry had argued that dominant siralegies are desirable because  they eli- minate bidders' 
›ncentivm to    aste resources trying to learn aboitt their com- pelitnrs in efforts  to infer what 
ihey might bid. One could add that by elimi- nating  stich guewwotk,  they  make  it  more likely  
that  ltte  efficient  outcome will  result  than do alternative  auction mechanisiiis.  Indeed,  
for auction  me- chanisms  like  ltte  standard  paled  render  io  result  in  efficient  
allocations, each bidder needs to guess correctly about the distribution  of competing bids matle 
b}' oiher biddeis. And, even when  the bidders do guess correc dy, the aL ternatiie  designs yield 
efficient outcomes only in a very limited class of enss- i-on ments, pnmarily thrive in which ihe 
bidder's types are idenlically distribu- ted. Victrey's  proposed  new ilesign docx  not require 
either cor rect expecta- tions or symmetric enwrnnmetiCs;  it is a much more reliable way to 
achieve ef- ficient  outcomes.

UNIVERSAL. TELkPf!ONE SERVICE
The problem ••* will discuss ‹odel = i•      ro»ake aIT•›r‹tsblc bas c telephone sctace available 
to cs<r}one (in  d e Unite‹t laws). Achimsng this goal ›s ox- wi¥e, for two reasons.  First, som   
customers hose u+cJ   low incomes  thitt mxn  modest  telephone charges are i nafTordablc. In  the 
Unite‹t Srsrcs, pro- grams designect   o albsidi›<  telephone serf+ce  to low incom cuuozucis arc 
called  lifeline  serslce" pzogjamu Second,  it  is  qt i\e  exp<ncne  to pr    ’ide telephone 
scriare in nnt‹1enis of some geographic areas Esinblisiiing serisce to  remote  customers,  stu•it  
as  thase  Tis*ng  on  farms a»‹t mnEâys    in   rural seas, i»ay  reqttire  run»i»g long a•ires  
tfiroHgh  difficult  terrain  to  serve u small gro«p oF tclcpljoije s\›bscnbm•. L  <n  within 
tirbn» sr<ss, ike  costs oF connecting  difFezcnt  cHstcu»ers  to ‹he  tefophon+  nel› ark  on      
      m»ong cummers bya factor of itn. Pn›gmms deiigncd io pay pari of  the cosi of pro•
>’icIing serlsce to high cost arcns are caI!e‹t "Hnivorsal service" progm›ns.
Thcr« sre »any ccc\sons commonly cited For mnking ofI”ordabTe  telephone
service available to mryane. In piirelr ec°•   •i•  ‹••»•. ••• =   r •v   • ‹! •t
a    cuscomer  who hooks uy  to ii  telephone network prm”idcsa   ser\Jce noc only
forhi*hommhobbu1a1sofoTmrr)rnctlseooChcCdcphoRcoCtworkwho t»ay cser want to conifer hio+. This 
letaork extornali\y*¿totifiessame public sHf›si‹t    +o promoio  jnor<  esrenszrc  use oI  
ceicphonc  scrsñcc.  Fn  addition. hooking people  to the telephone ne\work may be   I c che*p<st 
web For  the yubtic s«ccor ro fulfill obligsuons sucl› es pzo\iding pt‹bIlc health, saFety an‹f 
emergcn'::y services.  Wiihotit  telephones  to allow  residents In call for help, yubtic saFcty 
agencies might neect to rely on more expensive spotters and pa-
\roIs. Avoiding those cosrs prcn'ide6 che   ubTic \vitl\ R rtiruct financ‹a) ‹merest in promoting 
widesyrend iis« of telephones
Thci-o can also be imt›arrcnt  j›oliticat nnd socé\ reasons  to promote wide• spread telephone and 
a\leer comunica‹ions sczlaces. A democratic  society Haas an   in+erest in keeping its cmzcns 
in£ormert ebot I du\<Iojxments  tl zotigh- ottt the country an‹l porl aps file worlct anlt in 
pro‹ñdinga   means for thema co-m»nicstc cf£cctis<fy a1‹h their rcprcsentatis<s nnd among 
theinsel\’es. It also fias au interest in  prus<n\ing  social fragmcntatioil in  which ho«sol olds 
or whulc  comm‹micles  1i\e  with  Few  connections  tu  tht  rest  oF tfie  yoli  '. Uni\<zsaT  
telephone strx'ice ad ences tkcse in\crcs‹s.
IM practice, imj›lc ncntit ga   program oL Uni\ersitl '‹crvico insof <s  firsr 4o- fnyng tic       
tclcpt ono s«rtac«.“ \\1 at scm4ces d  ot l‹l br  included* \\1 at afl•
diiional  options slii›iild  be avñlablei Yt1i:M lvict  uf quality fdiptitit  he

yr‹n1Jer or pro\Mere o+Hst 1›e iJentifie‹I, an‹l a »vitns Intcst be fnnncl o££uot- ng the bih.
In tfie Unitcfl St*\t*s, basic local telcyI›n»c service has been ii»pJcc•d   s«h- sidmd hocl› 
throttgh r<<1ticed prices For basic telcjrl ‹»u  service supported higher mms  cl›argud  for ot)›er 
teIeco»m«nica\inns sert1ccs, s»ch ns long- clisiat ce calli»g, anfl tl rmigh the Use oF iiniFcn» 
\cl*pIio»c rates our   es4c as      In  Cai £ornia, fc›r example, m*it coclav• nnsnne in  ‹! c area 
ser  iceil /•

the  largest  telephone  company,  Pacific  Bell,  can  purchase  basic  telephone service for 
$11.SS per month. This price is the same for hillside dwellers in re- mote mountain communities as 
for residence of  large apartment buildings in dowritowti  Lot Angeles, even for apnrttnents that 
ate jve›t a  block  away  frcim the  main  telephone  switch.  The  phone  company's  cost  per  
phone  line  of hc›oking  the apartment  and its residenu into the system, ihough, is much lmv- er  
than for the mountain  dwellers,  beeauw  B Angle short high capacity wire can be usetl to provide 
service  to all of the large building's residents. The im- plicit subsidies  in  the system  are 
enormous:  one estimate  for  the  subsitly  tn rural service alone is about  $5 billion  per year  
 and 11ie estimated  size nf all rural and urban subsidies is higher still
So long  as local  telephone  service was providcd  b'y  monopolies  that  wer*• free  from  
competitive  market  constraihts,  this system wa5  sustainable.  In  re- cent ycats,  however,  
thy   p;ittern  has been  breaking  down.  New  phone  com- panies have sprung up lo offer mrviccs 
in places file Manñaua»  (mostly for busine:n  customers so far), where  the high density of  
telephone  lines makes the  average  cost  of   service  quite  I-.      With  ihe  passage  of   
thc  Tclccom- municalions  Act of 1996, which deregulated  such of local  telephone  wrvice and 
eeets  to  promote  increased  competition  in oil parts of  telecommunica- tions, a syslem  of  
uniform  local service  prices for all customers is rapidly be- coming untenable. The Act pw'ides 
for the establishment  nf a ñind to subsi- dize snrvice  to customer  in  high•costmf-service 
areiis.  Thc   Act also requires that the subsidy levels in each area he ulequate  to cover the 
universal  service pmvi‹1er’s com.
/t is now the task of  rcguiatcirs in decide how to impk•ment  the Art'i ptot4
sion s, keeping in mind the two main goals of encouraging competition  in rlie provision  of  
telecommunications wrvices and keeping down  the cost c›f xuh- sidies (and the taxes needed  to 
support them). ws well as subsidiary  goals like reducing  the need for oogoing regulation.
With  these goals in mind,  two main  kinds of  policy  options have  been dix c ussed. The   first 
 calls  for  the use  of  an aucñon  in which  bidders  name  the price  they  require  to accept  
a  universal  sers'ice  obligation  in  a service  area. This means ihai ihe selected suppliers 
smnd ready to offer a prescribed  hasic urvice package  at  a prescribed  “affordable  price.° Tiic 
advairtagc  of  this op-

drive doom  thy  nece      ry level of subsidie*. N   o,  once auctions  are conduct- ed, there 
would be no further need for cosi studies to determine appropriate levels of  subsidy to a monopoly 
 trite ptione supplier  Nevertheless,  this option is ot'ten  regarded  as unsatisfactory  because  
it results in  a  single  prcn'ider  in euch service area. Wilh  neither rompe ation nor 
i'egulation  to dfi    pt  ne  ihe
.single ptovitler,  their  would be liltJe pressure  on it  to inuoduce new services and  main\aoi  
h›gh siandazds of  quatig. Also, new telephone  provide may be able  to  bang  ›sluablc   new   
services,  !  Le   cheaper   long-distance   collMtt,   us




886

pacLages  including  telephone  eervice  with  wireless or cable  television  servi- ces. Having  a 
single provider  denies  these  potential  new  services  to custom- ers.
The second option  calls for estimating  the costs of  providing  basic  service in each area and  
then making  that level of  subsidy available  to any  company that is willing lo  accepi a 
universal service obligation for the area. This makes competiñve eniry relatively easy;  vinih all 
the advantages  that competiuon  en- tails. However, it has two bid   dimdvantages.  lint, because 
it bases subsidies on the existing vreline Mhnology and ignores rmenites from new services that 
might be delivered over the telephone  network. it locks in the subsidies at an unneceswnly  high  
lex'el.  In  addition,  it  requires  ongoing  regulatory  inter- vention  in  the form of  both  
cost studies  (to  meet  the  legal and practical  re- quirement   that  subsidy  levels  are  
adequate)  and  coercis'e  service  require- ments on ltte incumbent  telephone company at the 
established subsidy levels. Each of  these options has advaniages and disadvantages  and one inighi 
ex- pect that the optimal system could vary for different sersscc areas around the country.  Is  it 
 possible  tn  implement  different  systems  in  different  areai?  Is
there some astern  tJiar is l›etier than e›ther of these in es'ery case?

AN OPTIMAL AUCTION MECHANISM  FOR  UNIVERSAL
TELEPHONE  SERVICE
Using the theory of mnrkel design  thal Vickrey initiated, we can ash quesñons aboul what 
organization of the universal service market is best taking into act count both the desire  to 
promote competition and  the desire  to keep the to- tal subsidy cost  low.  In ltte process of  
answering  these questions,  the analysis generates an important new alternative in which  the 
number and identities of rhe  competitors   are  determined   by   the  market                     
iisel7,   rather  than being set by flat as in lraditionai auction  proposals. In par0cular, the 
new ap- proach ailows for different market swucturcs in different geographic regions as  ix certain 
 to be appmpriatc  given  the very  difterenl  cost  conditions  that prevail  in  different  
areas. The new  auction  mechanism  does  a much  better jnl› thun e Iher of the other  proposals 
oI  balancing 1he  two objectives of  pro- m‹›ung competiuon  "in the market" af\er  the aticcion,  
to promote  betrer ser- vice and more variety. and competition "for the market’ in ihe auction, to 
re- duce the level of subsidies that need  to be paid.’
Because  lhe  aclual  situation  in  supplying  universal  telephone  is so com- plex, the 
theoretical analysis advanced  here aims only to capture a few of ihc most  important  features  of 
 the  rear  situation.  We  begin  by  specifying  the objecuve of the whole exercise, which  o io 
maximize a “tntal welfare" crite- rion or objective consisting of vhree terms:






The first term is the benefits enjoyed  by the consiirricrs in an area, which de- pends on the 
level ct‘ competition  in the local telephone  martet. More com- petitors vying for customers can  
lead io various benefits  for consumers,  in- cluding more -cty, better service offerings,  and  
more  responsive  service. More competitrirs may lead  to lowcr  prices, ioo, if splitting the 
market does not increase costs loo much. To account for the interests of telephone com- pany 
Aareholders, we add the firm's profits to the social objective.
Then non initial terms, however, do  not include all the economic benefits and  costs. The taxes or 
surcharges used to pay universal service subsidies di» tort choices made in the economy and result 
in a ton of welfare. r   r example, if unixrnal  mrvice were funded by a tax on long-distance 
calls, that could re- sult in fewer  such calls being  made-calls  that would be made if the price 
of long-distance  calling  were  not  made  artificially  high  by  the  additional  tnz. The   
welfare  losa  from  such  distortions  is approuimalely  propo rñonal  io  the total subsidies 
paid; it o  captured by the third lerm in the formal objectives
To simplify  the  problem  for  this  presentation,  we  make  a  number  of somptions whose 
significance we discuss  briefly at Ore end of this lecture. Y'e focus on ltte case Wtiere  there 
is a single region in which un›x<rsa1 service is to be  provided  and  where  all  subsidies  are  
paid  in  the  form  of  a  lump  xum. There are assumed tn be N bidders indexed as i=1,..., N.
Each of the bidders has a cost ’      e" 8i that determines its cuxi of proofing service  to some  
or all of  the CttStoiners  in  the service  area. We  may  think  of lower values of 8  as 
corresponding  tn lc›wor tntal and marginal costs for firm
0  fi IN    way that allows it  to earn greater profits in any particular compe ñtive si-
tuation.  Lrt  f  denote  the  Vtuple  (8¿,....8y).  Let N(8,a  denote  the  profit earned by firm 
i when lhe set of forms receiving subsidies tn accept the univet- at service obligation  is 6 and 
let 6t6,Y  denote  the benefits enjoyed  by con- sumers. We Hume that (1) profits and consumer 
benefii* depend only on the types (0i,i£5S)  of the firms in S, that is, the firms aclually 
providing  telephone service, (fl) a firm can earn profits only if it is authorized  to supply 
subsidized wrvicc, that is, N(8,f)J if i   S, ($) N(8,5 Is continuously differentiable in &j,
and  t4) for all 0 and all  if,    profi is are decreasing in   ;  ='t P.U-%d8/ s0.
The auction  that  is implemented,  including  ihe rules for the kinds of bids
that can be made and  the way firms behave in
which firms will receive subsidies in exchange 1or bearing the universai service obligation and 
ivhal subsidy parents they will receive. The aclual outcome of the anceon   annot l›e predicted in 
advance because  it depenAx,  of course, on ltte cost  types  8. One can  describe  rhe likely  
outcomes  by  a  set ‹›f functions which express the probabilities 9y0) Oiat 8 will be the set of 
firms selected  to he suppliers when  the cost types arc given lv  8 and the cor responding expect- 
at  levels of ziibsnd}' payments Qty    to each firm  i. With  the outcomes descriW ed in this way, 
the corresponding expected level of welfare, gis      B, is:

M8




The e;tpectcd value of this welfare measure is to he maximiuxl by chming fiinctions pt(By  and y(B) 
 (i=l,..„J  corresponding  to a feasible auction end associated  bidding  behaoor.  For ihe  
expected  value  calculation,  we anltme that the 8;s are Independent and dliuibnmd according  io 
dlsuibuiion  funo- oons 6j with corresponding denssdes      i=!.   ,I\/. 3‘hus, expected welfare 
Is:




be     u-ick la  analvzing  this pn›bIern is ro characterize  t1+c consuainu aa  die hand rj 
functions ihat are implied by our peuulaies concerning how the l›id- deri  will  behave. Following  
Vickrey, we assume  that the bidders act  tn  maxi- mize ihcir ou'n profits, given correct 
expectetioni ahout how otherx wit{ bid. That is, we assume tier the bidder will play a Nash        
ilibrium of whatever auction game be  may dmign. To 4olvc  the maximiznnon  problem, uv utilize 
mhni9ues dnscloped  in  the Roger Mjerson's 1981  analysis of auctiotn  that maxlmlze the seller's 
expected revenues.•
The  foil ‹lnmik  of  ‹he  mathematical  znaiysis null  not  be  reported  here.
What Myerson*s analysis dcmonsuaies is iiut dv  p  combined with the avoid- ance of iinnece       y 
au1uid›es  to Ionng bidders  together determine  the ne- century expected subsidy levels    th(O I 
®J . Thia nllows one to substitute for  in  the objectism  function, rewriting  it as the  
expectation  of the following  zl- ternatiee objective liincñon:



r(s.e)-B(e,o+§ (u•>'(e,o+-:(a,o,|g'{
The    fhncuon  @$@  is cailed die "uitYuof  u<{/’ore" function.  We !imir atlen- finn today u› 
what is sometimes cailod the •rcgular mse," in whica for tach ¥ ihe vlrttlai  welfuru  function  is 
decreasing  in  0. The wpshot of  the analytic  ñ the ff•llowing:


The mcist striking aspect of an optimal auction ›s that it necessarily entails tndopwtou          d 
 itnict«m  This means  that the set of firms partic›poting  in rise market clepcnde ot› che firm's 
oosr characteristics, whlch is rhe priYato in•

formation of the firms. If there are m'eral independent  regions in which uni- versal service is tn 
be supplied, the result is that different niunbers of compet- itors may  be present in eacE, 
according  to  the privately  known cost informa- tion of the firms.
In determining  the optimal set of firm to Include in the market,  lhe pm htm of Brae 'krms are 
given extra weight in  the vixtuzt inflate function cntnpav- ed to the original  social objective: 
it is friultiplied by I*0.  In addition,  Y(S,8)
includes  terms  (F'   f:I  )  to  account  lor  Lhe  bidding  incentives  of  the  firms. A   
ating  universal  ser'rice  subsidies  to  mand   firfns  tends  to  reduce  the  in-
ceniive  of  each  firm  to  bid  aggressively,  8ince  eren  a  less aggressive  bid  is more 
likely to result in a reward. Therefore. un!ess there are disecc›nomiex  of' scale  (which  is 
unlikely  in  practice), one consequence  of designing  as  auc- tion  to allow multiple  universal 
service  providers is hl@lier aver-age  sub8ldies. An optimal  siictic'n  design  takes  that  
effect  into account,  typically reducing the number  of firms both io increase  pre-subsidy 
industry  profit  and  to in- cream the intensity of competiñon  “for the markel.”
Although  the optimal  auction  analysis generates  quite specific  statements about which  firms  
ahould  be  in  lhe  market  in  cach  s      ific  circumstance (identified @  &),  it does not 
specify a  unique rule for how pa)nienu  siiouid be ma&, This conclusion was foreshadowed  in 
Vickrey‘s 1961 paper, in which he found several auctions with different payment rules that aiI led 
io efflcIHDt akocations  in certain  ximple contents,  and  lhat  also  all  led  to  the same  ex- 
pected  payirients  by  bidders.   In   the  present   fnore  complicated   context, Vickrcy's 
insight still applies:  there are many diffcwnt optimal  auctions,  that is,  many  payment  rules 
that  can implement  the  allocation  rule  identified  in the Proposition.
The  multiplicity  of optimal  payment  rules  means  that  there  is  scope  fc•r using  the 
payment rule to pursue secondary objectives. One such objective is to arrange  that ench  bi‹Jder 
has a  fa     none sfznfegy.  The advantages of domi- nanc sfrsp@eg  as identified  br Tic       r. 
has    a!    •*r  been explained.  The   ba-
sc  rtile for making truthful  reporung of cost data a dominant strategy (s also
one that Vickrey (liJtil) had identified. One does that by “paying each seller for his supply an  
amount equal to what he could exRact as a perfectly price discriminating monopolist  {against ihe 
residue demand curve].” In ihis case, the analogous rule is as follows: For each 8, pay fii-m j  a 
subsidy that makes its post-subsidy  profit  equal  to the  increase  in  the  rfiaximal value of  
the virtual welfare function,  F(,8), that results from expanding  the set of available firms MJ)   
 to ñ'  This rule implements  the allocation identified in the Propos:1ion, and makes truthful  
reporting a dominant sirate    .
Another possible secondary objective is to pay unifor m subsidies  to all sub-
sidized  universal service suppliers,  There mar °•  legal reasons  to prefer uni- form subsidies. 
Uniform  per suhscriber subsidies may alsn he desired because
they avoid advantaging  any  parlicular competitor  when  the competition  for customers begins.  
Allhough unUorm  iubsid es are posâifile, it is not possible to achieve both uniform suhsidies and 
dominant  strategy implementation of the opumal a\Tction.

390

MMITATIONS AND POSSIBLE  EXTENSIONS
The  foregoing analysis is a preliminary  one  that is valuable  partly  because  it introduce6 a 
new approach  to regulating  and financing the prtivisioti  of nun versal  telephone  service.  
However,  the  recommended  approach  is only  as good as the ttnderlying model. The model itself 
omits .several  possibly impur- lant Factors.
One of che most important  assumptions of the model ›s rhas $utoid‹cs arc paid in the  form of a It 
mp  sum, regardless of the  nurnb#£ if  B\Jbscrrbers scr• ved.  In  realiy, lump stim  subsidies 
ait• highly  undesirable, and  the  political
^'=  •   •°•   ^•     +•C•••d P=”   *!r   •  P  • subscriber subsidies. Because sub-
sidies        noedcd  u  ’F Fur h‹gh-cust customers For whom  service is unremu-
ncrauve,  it is necessarily  wrong  to suppose  that service  would  be voluntarily
provided  at art,  let aione ai ihe  same level,  if subsidy  levels were low. To put the po›nt 
›nore generally, the level of subsidies is likelr to afTect  Lhe intensit}' uf competition smong 
suppliers, and  Lhe exisiing  moctel fails to account for

A  second   potentially   important   omiuion   concerns   variations  in  costs ainong customers  
in  the  area of  universal  service.  If  the  cost  variations  are large across the scrvice 
area, firms may be lempled lo offer service only to lhe customers in the lowest cost segments of 
ltte service area. That problem could be resolved by running auctions for smarter, more homogcnotts 
area.s, and in- deed sitch  a proposal  has been  made in  the United States.  However,  if small 
sers*ce   areas are specified for ltte auction, it mar       '••    r     p*•   e   ‹•  c•••t*••
the costs of service  separately  for each area, because  there could  b< impor-
tant  shared costs among  them.  As of  the date of this lecture,  the imporunce of such shared 
costs ffir universal service remains an open questic›n.
Finally*  dur›ng  the  uansition  to competitive  ptuvision  of  local  telephone service in ihe 
United Sites, the incumbent  local exchange  carriers coniinue in have a special obligation  to 
offer service. The analysis suggested  here  has been vague sbour the derails nd how rhc tmnsirion  
will be made. The  timing of  auctions  in  different  service  area  could  be  important,  as  
could  issues about the relaiinn c'f the auction rules ti› uther local competiiion  rules. Ail of 
ihese details need  tn be worked  our carefully if universal service auctions are in be 
successfully  implemented.


CONCLUSION
Throughout  most  of his career. Vickrey was interesled  in ideas thal were im- mediately  
applicable  to  problems  that  concerned  him.  He  was  particularly proud of his work on the New 
York subway system, on which he had expend- ed  enormous  elTort.  Gi\’en  that  perspective,  
Vickney  woulfl  probably  ha›’e been surprised  to learn  that his   J96J  paper. which he thought 
oL as abswact theory, co«ld be the basi6 of something so useful as practical market dev gn. The 
faci is. however, thai ii has been jtisl in  the past fifteen pars that new 
con‹ñbuGonsfn›i|dingonVicLnc/sp›ooecnng+*rkhavcad  nced‹heEh+

ory  of  aitciion  design  sufficiently  to  make  it  widely  useful  fur  applications. Despite 
its theoretical depth, or more likely t›ecauic of it, Vickrey's contribu- tions to auction  theory 
may have been his most prnctical work  of all.

REFERENCES
Done,  {ames and Kathryn Spier,  designing a Private Indus     ,”/ounoi o/tube W›ioñr.‹ S$

Mirrlces, james A,   “An Exploration  in  the Theory of Optimal Income Taxation,“               o/
F.‹Dominic   tyñies  9R ( 1971):  175—208.
RlJrson,  Roger.  Optimal  Auction  Design,’  4J«fAeo‹ifics  @         m           mmW     6  t 
1981):
58-75.
Vickrey, William, Wunierspeculatioii, Attctions and Gompctitivr Scaled Tenders.’Journo/

Vickrcy,   William,  “Auctions  and  Bidding   Cannes,’  in  Rmi     ddiie›too  in  Grin  Dmy
Princeton: Princeton  Univcoitv Pres , 1962.
