CAPITAL ASSET PRICES
WITH AND WITHOUT NEGATIVE HOLDINGS

Nobel Lecture, December 7, 1990

by
W ILLIAM F. S H A R P E

Stanford University Graduate School of Business, Stanford, California,
USA




INTRODUCTION*
Following tradition, I deal here with the Capital Asset Pricing Model, a
subject with which I have been associated for over 25 years, and which the
Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences has cited in honoring me with the
award of the Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel.
   I first present the Capital Asset Pricing Model (hence, CAPM), incorpo-
rating not only my own contributions but also the outstanding work of
                                          1



Lintner (1965, 1969) and the contributions of Mossin (1966) and others. My
goal is to do so succinctly yet in a manner designed to emphasize the
economic content of the theory.
   Following this, I modify the model to reflect an extreme case of an
institutional arrangement that can preclude investors from choosing fully
optimal portfolios. In particular, I assume that investors are unable to take
negative positions in assets. For this version of the model I draw heavily
from papers by Glenn (1976), Levy (1978), Merton (1987) and Markowitz
(1987, 1990).
   Finally, I discuss the stock index futures contract - a major financial
innovation of worldwide importance that postdates the development of the
CAPM. Such contracts can increase the efficiency of capital markets in
many ways. In particular, they can bring actual markets closer to the
idealized world assumed by the Capital Asset Pricing Model.

THE CAPITAL ASSET PRICING MODEL
The initial version of the CAPM, developed over 25 years ago, was extreme-
ly parsimonious. It dealt with the central aspects of equilibrium in capital
markets and assumed away many important aspects of such markets as they

* I am particularly grateful for the detailed comments and suggestions on the contents of this
lecture provided by Robert Litzenberger and Andre Perold. Subsequent comments and sugges-
tions by Haim Levy and Harry Markowitz are also gratefully acknowledged. My longer-term
debt to colleagues in many places is also substantial; I particularly wish to thank those at
Stanford University and at William F. Sharpe Associates for their contributions to my work over
the years.
1
  beginning with Sharpe (1961) and Sharpe (1964).


                                     W. F. Sharpe                           313


existed at the time. In the last 25 years, theorists have extended and adapted
the approach to incorporate some of these real-world phenomena. Impor-
tant examples are Lintner’s (1969) version, which focuses on returns in real
terms; Brennan’s (1970) version, which deals with the effects of taxation;
Black’s (1972) version in which there is no riskless asset; Merton’s (1973)
version, which incorporates investors’ concern with future investment op-
portunities; Rubinstein’s (1974) version, which deals with a more general
class of utility functions; Kraus and Litzenberger’s (1976) version, which
takes into account the third moment of the return distribution; Levy’s
(1978) version, which incorporates transactions costs; Breeden’s (1979)
version, which focuses on investors’ preferences for consumption; Merton’s
(1987) version, which deals with market segmentation; and Markowitz’
(1990) version, which considers restrictions on short sales.
   Throughout, empiricists have subjected variations of the model to tests of
increasing power. Moreover, alternative models have been proposed, most
notably Ross’ (1976) Arbitrage Pricing Theory.
   While theorists have been busy adapting the CAPM to incorporate real-
world impediments to efficiency, practitioners have been equally busy re-
ducing some of those impediments. Many of the financial instruments and
institutions developed in the last decade serve to better “complete the
markets” - in particular, to allow a more efficient distribution of risk
among investors.
   I will not attempt a general treatment of the institutional costs and
constraints that can affect the efficiency with which risk is allocated, nor of
the many recent financial innovations that serve to reduce such costs and
constraints. Instead, I will focus on one prototypical example - restrictions
on negative positions in securities, and one such innovation - stock index
futures.
   To facilitate the exposition, many formulas and proofs will be relegated
to footnotes. In this I follow a long personal tradition, since a key proof in
Sharpe (1964) - my first published paper on the Capital Asset Pricing
Model - was contained in a footnote2.

THE CAPM AND FINANCIAL ECONOMIC THEORY
A common taxonomy of work in financial economics differentiates between
normative (prescriptive) and positive (descriptive) theories. Markowitz’ (1952)
path-breaking mean-variance portfolio theory falls cleanly into the former
category, dealing as it does with rules for optimal portfolio choice by an
individual. The CAPM can be neatly classified as belonging to the latter,
since it is concerned with the determination of the prices of capital assets in
a competitive market. But two such categories are not sufficient. Much of
the work in the field can best be described as approaching normative issues in
a positive context. The seminal Modigliani-Miller (1958) model is of this
genre, since it prescribes optimal behavior for a corporation faced with a

2
    more specifically, footnote 22


314                                Economic Sciences 1990

 capital market in which security prices are determined by the actions of
 individual investors cognizant of opportunities for substitution.
    Even this three-way taxonomy fails to capture the interrelationships
 among the alternative approaches. Most positive models in financial eco-
 nomics, like those in the broader field of economics, are built on normative
 foundations. Individuals engaging in maximizing behavior are assumed to
 interact with one another until an equilibrium condition is reached. This is
 clearly the case with the CAPM, which explicitly assumes that investors
 follow the prescriptions of Markowitz’ portfolio theory. Moreover, as in
 traditional micro-economic theory, financial economic theories of equilibri-
 um relationships are taken as prescriptions for decisions in markets that
 may not strictly conform to the conditions of the theory.
    The domain of positive financial economics theory is sometimes divided
 into a set of models that may be termed utility-based and a complementary
 set that may be termed arbitrage-based. Models that fall in the latter category
 derive implications from the assumption that capital asset prices will adjust
 until it is impossible to find a strategy that requires no initial investment,
 provides a positive cash flow in at least one state of nature, and requires no
 negative cash flow in any future state of nature 3. Models that fall in the
 former category typically conform to the conditions required for the latter,
 but derive stronger implications due to added assumptions about the utility
functions that investors are assumed to maximize4.
    Much of the early work in financial economics dealt with markets in which
 the interaction of a large number of individuals, each equally informed,
 determined prices. In this sense the work followed the tradition of competi-
 tive equilibrium theory in economics. More recently, attention has focused
 on markets in which there are few participants and/or in which different
 individuals have different sets of information.
    The CAPM is, of course, a theory in the earlier tradition of the field. It is
 a positive theory, incorporates assumptions about investors’ utility func-
 tions, and assumes a market with a large number of participants, each of
 whom has access to the same set of information.



3
  Prominent arbitrage-based theories in financial economics are the Black-Scholes (1973) model,
which deals with the prices of options vis-a-vis related securities, and Ross’ (1976) Arbitrage
Pricing Theory, which draws implications about the prices of capital assets when returns are
generated by a specified factor model. While the monumental Arrow (1953) Debreu (1959)
state-preference approach to uncertainty makes some assumptions about individual’s utility
functions, many of its key results are arbitrage-based. A number of theories in financial
economics have been constructed using the Arrow-Debreu “state of the world” paradigm,
among them the binomial model of option pricing first presented in my textbook (1978) and
then extended by Cox, Ross, and Rubinstein (1979) and many others.
4
  It is, of course, true that arbitrage-based models make some assumptions about investor
preferences - for example, that investors prefer larger payoffs to smaller payoffs in any given
state of the world. However, such assumptions are minimal, compared with the more detailed
assumptions of utility-based models.


                                           W. F. Sharpe                                         315


CAPITAL ASSET PRICES WITH NEGATIVE HOLDINGS
Assumptions
Assume that the economy consists of K investors. Investor k’s invested
wealth, expressed as a proportion of the total wealth invested by all inves-
tors is Wk.. He or she wishes to maximize:

                                                                                                 (1)

    For expository convenience, I will term Uk investor K’s utility. It may be
 regarded as a primitive utility function. Alternatively, it may be considered
 an approximation to the investor’s expected utility in the sense of Von
 Neumann and Morgenstern (1944). If the investor is assumed to have a
 negative exponential utility function over wealth and returns are jointly
 normally distributed, the approximation will be exact. Even if the investor
 has some other utility function and/or returns are not jointly normally
 distributed, Uk may provide an excellent approximation, as shown by Levy
 and Markowitz (1979).
    In equation (1), Ek is the expected return on investor k’s portfolio, V k is
 the variance of the portfolio, and zk is his or her risk tolerance. Investors
differ in risk tolerance.
    This relationship can be interpreted in a number of useful ways. Clearly,
 risk tolerance measures an investor’s marginal rate of substitution of variance
for expected return. For convenience we assume that each investor’s risk
 tolerance is constant over the feasible range of expected return and vari-
 ance s.
    The value obtained by dividing portfolio variance by an investor’s risk
 tolerance can be characterized as a risk penalty, leading to the interpretation
 of Uk as a risk-adjusted expected return. Alternatively, Uk may be considered a
 certainty-equivalent return, since a portfolio with a return of Uk and zero risk
 would have the same utility for the investor as the portfolio in question.
    This is the objective function of Markowitz’ (1952) “mean-variance”
 approach to portfolio selection. It is a highly parsimonious characterization
 of investors’ goals, employing a myopic view (i.e. “one period at a time”)
 and focusing on only two aspects of the probability distribution of possible
 returns over that period6. Moreover, it assumes that the investor7 can assess
 at least the first two moments of the probability distributions associated with
 alternative investment portfolios. The genius of the approach is its ability to
5
  This is not required. The results that follow can be obtained under more general conditions,
with the resultant values of 7k interpreted as investors’ marginal rates of substitution, given their
optimal holdings.
6
  Note, however, that this assumption will be less onerous, the shorter the time period under
consideration. In continuous-time versions of the model, the time period is (in effect) infinites-
imal in length. Under such conditions, two moments may serve as adequate representations even
if the probability distribution of returns over a finite period and/or investors’ preferences for
returns over such a period are quite complex.
7
  aided, perhaps by an advisor


316                                                    Economic, Sciences 1990


c a pt ur e m u c h of w h at m att er s t o i n v e st or s. M or e o v er, it s er v e s w ell a s a b a s e
f or e xt e n si o n s a n d a d a pt ati o n s d e si g n e d t o a c c o m m o d at e a d diti o n al a s p e ct s
of i n v e st or’ s pr ef er e n c e s.
    A s i n M ar k o wit z’ w or k, t h e e x p e ct e d r et ur n o n a p ortf oli o d e p e n d s o n t h e
e x p e ct e d r et ur n s o n it s c o m p o n e nt s e c uriti e s 8 . A p ortf oli o’ s ri s k d e p e n d s
o n b ot h t h e ri s k s of t h e c o m p o n e nt s e c uriti e s a n d o n t h eir c orr el ati o n s wit h
o n e a n ot h er. M or e s u c ci n ctl y: p ortf oli o ri s k d e p e n d s o n t h e c o v ari a n c e s
a m o n g s e c uriti e s’.
    All i n v e st or s ar e i n a gr e e m e nt c o n c er ni n g e x p e ct e d r et ur n s a n d c o v ar-
i a n c e s. Of c o ur s e, t h e s e m o m e nt s of t h e j oi nt di stri b uti o n of s e c urit y
r et ur n s will b e a f u n cti o n of s e c urit y pri c e s. W h e n e q uili bri u m pri c e s ar e
att ai n e d, h o w e v er, e a c h i n v e st or will c h o o s e a n o pti m al p ortf oli o, gi v e n t h e
c urr e nt v al u e s of e x p e ct e d r et ur n s a n d c o v ari a n c e s; m or e o v er t h e r e s ult a nt
p ortf oli o c h oi c e s will c a u s e t h e m ar k et s t o cl e ar.
    I n v e st or s ar e all o w e d t o t a k e n e g ati v e p o siti o n s i n o n e or m or e a s s et s.
T h u s h ol di n g s m a y b e p o siti v e, z er o or n e g ati v e. T h er e ar e n o tr a n s a cti o n s
c o st s or ot h er c o n str ai nt s a n d a s s et p o siti o n s ar e f ull y di vi si bl e.

P o rtf oli o O pti m alit y
I n v e st or k s e e k s t o m a xi mi z e U k s u bj e ct t o a f ull i n v e st m e nt c o n st r ai nt of t h e
f or m:



     w h er e X i k r e pr e s e nt s t h e pr o p orti o n of i n v e st or k’ s p ortf oli o i n v e st e d i n
a s s et i.
     T o d o s o, h e or s h e m u st s el e ct a p ortf oli o i n w hi c h t h e m a r gi n al utilit y of
e v er y s e c urit y i s t h e s a m e. If t hi s w er e n ot t h e c a s e, it w o ul d b e p o s si bl e t o
r e all o c at e f u n d s fr o m a s e c urit y wit h a l o w er m ar gi n al utilit y t o o n e wit h a
hi g h er o n e, t h er e b y i n cr e a si n g utilit y wit h o ut vi ol ati n g t h e f ull i n v e st m e nt
c o n str ai nt.
     T hi s fi r st o r d e r c o n diti o n f or p ortf oli o o pti m alit y c a n b e r e pr e s e nt e d a s
f oll o w s:

                                                                                 f or all i.                               ( 2)

    H er e C i k i s t h e c o v ari a n c e of s e c urit y i wit h i n v e st or k’ s o pti m al p ortf oli o
a n d h p i s i n v e st or k’ s m a r gi n al utilit y of w e alt h”.




8
    T h e e x p e ct e d r et ur n of i n v e st or k’ s p ortf oli o i s gi v e n b y:

w h er e X i k r e pr e s e nt s t h e pr o p orti o n of i n v e st or k’ s p ortf oli o i n v e st e d i n a s s et i.
9
  T h e v ari a n c e of i n v e st or k’ s p ortf oli o i s gi v e n b y:


w h er e C, r e pr e s e nt s t h e c o v ari a n c e b et w e e n t h e r et ur n s o n a s s et s i a n d j.


                                              W. F. Sharpe                                           317

Aggregation
Assume that markets have cleared, so that all securities are held by the K
investors in the economy. Relationships among key variables can be exam-
ined by aggregating the conditions that must hold when each investor
obtains an optimal solution, taking into account the relative amounts of
wealth that each has invested. To do so requires only a few straightforward
operations. In effect, a wealth-weighted average is taken of the first-order
conditions for each security. Not surprisingly, the result is similar to that
obtained earlier:

                                                             for all i.

  Here, z, is the wealth-weighted risk tolerance of the investors in the
market, or the societal risk tolerance. The value of Cim represents the covar-
iance of security i with the market portfolio, which includes all securities in
the market, with each represented in proportion to its outstanding value.
The last term is a weighted average of the values of J+ for the K investors,
with the weights depending on the investors’ influences in the marketplace,
where influence depends on both invested wealth and risk tolerance. It can
be interpreted as the societal marginal utility of wealth”.

Expected Returns
One of the key implications of the CAPM concerns the relationships among
the expected returns of capital assets. It can be obtained by a minor
rearrangement of the previous equation to give:




 Incorporating Uk, and the full investment constraint in a Lagrangean function to be maximized
10



gives:

Clearly 5 is the marginal ulility of wealth for investor k, since it equals the partial derivative of Zk
with respect to the investor’s wealth (in this metric, the value 1 in the parenthesized full
investment constraint, since the Xik values are expressed as proportions of the investor’s total
wealth).
Recall that:



Hence, taking the partial derivative of Zk with respect to investor k’s holding of security i gives:



But note that the covariance of security i with any portfolio p will equal a weighted average of
the covariances of the security with the securities in the portfolio, using relative portfolio
holdings as weights. Here:

Substituting this relationship in the prior equation and rearranging terms gives equation (2).


318                                 Economic Sciences 1990

   This shows that in equilibrium there is a linear relationship between the
expected returns on securities and their covariances with the market portfo-
lio. Usually the relationship is expressed in terms of a security’s beta, a scaled
measure obtained by dividing a security’s covariance with the market port-
folio by the variance of the market portfolio (Vm). Substituting this measure
gives:

                                                                 for all i,                   (5)

where:




   Of course, equation (5) is also linear. Moreover, since portfolio expected
returns and covariances with the market portfolio are simply value-weighted
averages of the corresponding measures for the component securities, it
follows that this relationship holds for all portfolios as well as for all
securities.

The Risk Premium
Since the previous equation holds for any portfolio, it will hold for the
market portfolio itself. Moreover, the beta value of the market portfolio
with itself must equal 1. Letting E m represent the expected return on the
market portfolio, these relationships imply that:




11
  To derive equation (3) begin by multiplying all terms in equation (2) by Q and rearranging
slightly, giving:

Next, multiply all terms by Wk. then sum over all investors, giving:


Define Tm as:

Now consider the second term. Note that:

where I?, and ri, are, respectively, the returns on security i and investor k’s portfolio. By the
properties of covariance:

But the summation on the right-hand side is simply a wealth-weighted average of the returns on
the investor’s portfolios or, more simply put, the return on the market portfolio. Hence the
summation on the left-hand side is the covariance of the return on security i with that of the
market portfolio, which can be denoted Cim.
Making these substitutions and dividing all terms by ~~ gives:



The last term is a weighted average of the values of $ for the K investors, with the weights given
by the product of Wk and rk. Denoting this h/- gives equation (3).


                                        W. F. Sharpe                                      319


  The term on the left-hand side is the risk premium per unit of variance. As
the equation shows, it is inversely related to societal risk tolerance.

The Security Market Line
Substituting the risk premium per unit of variance for 2/2, in the equation
for security expected returns gives a more traditional form of the relation-
ship:

                                                           for all i.
   A graphical portrayal is termed the security market line. The CAPM implies
that all securities and portfolios will plot along such a line. Many would
argue that this relationship is the most important single conclusion derived
from the CAPM. It shows that expected returns will be linearly related to
market risk, but not, as often believed, to total risk

Riskless Borrowing and Lending
As can be seen from equation (7), hk may be interpreted as the expected
return on any “zero-beta” portfolio, including the zero-beta portfolio with
minimum variance, as suggested by Black (1972). If a riskless asset is
available, If,,, will equal Rf, the riskless rate of return. Under these condi-
tions, the Security Market Line relationship can be written:

                                                          for all i
   Henceforth, we assume that a riskless asset does exist and can be held in
positive or negative amounts - i.e. that investors may either lend or borrow
at the riskless rate Rf

The Characteristic Line
The value of pt,,, may be given an interpretation similar to that found in
regression analysis utilizing historic data, although in the context of the
CAPM it is to be interpreted strictly as an ex ante value based on probabilis-
tic beliefs about future outcomes. The relationship between Ri and &, the
stochastic returns on security i and the market portfolio, respectively, can
be written as:


  Given the manner in which &, is defined, it must be the case that Ei is
uncorrelated with12 &. Moreover, ai can be defined so that the expected
value of 6, is zero. However, there is no reason to expect that & - the
residual return or non-market component of return for security i - will be
uncorrelated with the comparable component for security j13.

 but not necessarily independent of
 12



 In fact, this cannot strictly be the case except in economies with infinitely many securities.
 13



Since the market-value weighted sum of the left-hand sides of equation (9) equals fi,, the
market-weighted sum of the g values must be zero. Thus at least two of the i values must be
negatively correlated.


320                                    Economic Sciences 1990

  While the CAPM places no restrictions on the correlations of the residual
terms, it does restrict the values of the intercept (ai ) terms. Since the
expected value of Ei is zero, the security market line relationship requires
that each intercept be related directly to the security’s beta value 14. The
CAPM thus implies that:

                                                                                        (10)
   A graphical portrayal of this relationship is termed a security or portfo-
lio’s characteristic line.

Factor Models of Security Returns
Much confusion has arisen concerning the relationship between the equilib-
rium results of the CAPM and the underlying relationships among security
returns. As can be seen, the CAPM makes no assumptions about the “return
generating process”. Hence, its results are completely consistent with any
such process.
   Early approaches to portfolio selection15, assumed that returns were
generated by a model similar (but not identical) to that of equation (9), with
the further condition that the residual values were uncorrelated across
securities 16. My initial approach to capital asset pricing in Sharpe (1961)
made a similar assumption. Such a “single index” or “single factor” model
represents a special case of a factor model of security returns. Multi-factor
models have been explored by a number of researchers and currently enjoy
widespread use in financial practice.
   A factor model of security returns identifies a relatively few key factors to
which a security’s return is assumed to be linearly related, in the following
manner:

                                                                                         (11)
   In such a model the Ei values are assumed to be uncorrelated across
securities. Ross’ (1976) Arbitrage Pricing Theory (APT) concludes that if
returns are generated by such a model, expected returns must be approxi-
mately linearly related to the bil values if opportunities to gain through
arbitrage are to be precluded. However, the APT provides no implications
concerning either the signs or the magnitudes of the coefficients in the
associated pricing relationship.
   It is entirely possible to augment the assumptions of the APT with those

 14
      Taking expectations of equation (9) gives:

 Comparison with (8) implies that:

 15
    such as that suggested by Markowitz (1959) that I further developed in Sharpe (1961, 1963
 and 1970).
 16
    In such a model the “common factor” can be highly correlated with the return on the market
 portfolio, but not precisely equal to it if the assumption that the residual values are to be
 uncorrelated with one another is to be maintained.


                                             W. F. Sharpe                                     321

of the CAPM (most importantly, the assumption that investors maximize
mean-variance utility functions). The resulting implications will then be
consistent with both theories. Moreover, by making assumptions about
investors’ objectives one can obtain precise statements about the signs and
magnitudes of the coefficients of the APT pricing relationship, as I have
shown in Sharpe (1984).

The Efficiency of the Market Portfolio
A key concept due to Markowitz (1952) is that of the efficiency of a portfolio.
In the present context a portfolio can be said to be efficient if it would be
optimal for an investor with some (non-negative) risk tolerance. Compari-
son of equations (2) and (3) directly implies that the market portfolio is
efficient in this sense.
   Consider an investor who has a risk tolerance equal to z, and holds the
market portfolio. Equation (3) shows that the first-order conditions for the
maximization of his or her utility will be met for every security. Since the
market portfolio will be optimal for such an investor, it must be efficient.
More specifically, the market portfolio will be optimal for an investor with
the average (societal) risk tolerance.

The Two-fund Separation Theorem
Under the conditions assumed in the CAPM, every investor’s optimal port-
folio can be obtained by a suitably chosen combination of any two arbitrarily
selected efficient portfolios17. Two natural choices are those that would be
optimal for investors with risk tolerances of zero and 7,. The former is the
minimum-variance portfolio. The latter is, of course, the market portfolio.
Following Tobin (1969), this is generally termed the two-fund separation
theorem.
   When a riskless asset is available, the minimum-variance portfolio will be
composed solely of that asset. Thus all investors will hold combinations of
the riskless asset and the market portfolio. For investors with risk tolerance

17
     To provide two-fund separation in this case, rewrite equation (2) as follows:

Portfolio optimality requires that this relationship be satisfied for each of the N securities and
that the full-investment constraint be met. This gives rise to a set of N+ 1 simultaneous
equations that can be written as:




where hz represents ‘TV hp. Writing this in matrix notation gives:

The solution, obtained by multiplying both sides by the inverse of D is thus:

Note that the optimal portfolio is a linear function of Q. Thus it can be restated as a linear
function of any two vectors satisfying the above equation associated with different values of Q.


322                               Economic Sciences 1990

greater than T,, optimal investment will involve a negative position in the
riskless asset and a positive position in the market portfolio - and hence all
risky assets. Note, however, that the market portfolio will include the net
positive supply of riskless assets in the economy; hence only investors with $
values considerably greater than ‘5, will actually have to borrow money.
Every other investor will select some combination of the riskless asset and
the market portfolio, and thus require only non-negative holdings.

Key Implications
The key implications of the CAPM are that:
   1. the market portfolio will be efficient,
   2. all efficient portfolios will be equivalent to investment in the market
portfolio plus, possibly, lending or borrowing, and
   3. there will be a linear relationship between expected return and beta.
   Practical applications of these relationships are many. Investors can easily
identify efficient portfolio strategies and such strategies can be effectively
implemented through mutual funds and other institutional vehicles. Corpo-
rate and governmental decision-makers can use the Security Market Line
relationship to determine the desirability of an investment project by com-
paring its expected return with that available in the capital market for
projects with similar beta values (i.e. with similar market risk or sensitivity to
economic conditions).
   In the frictionless world of the CAPM, each investor chooses a portfolio
that maximizes his or her utility. This leads to an efficient distribution of risk
in the economy, given, of course, the distribution of wealth among inves-
tors.

NEGATIVE HOLDINGS
The CAPM assumes that investors can take negative positions in assets. For
the riskless asset, the traditional manner in which such a position is achieved
involves borrowing money. For a risky asset, the traditional method re-
quires a short sale.
  A “short position” is achieved by borrowing an asset such as a share of
stock, with a promise to repay in kind, typically on demand. The borrowed
asset is then sold, generating a cash receipt. If the proceeds of the sale may
be used for other types of investment, the overall effect is equivalent to that
of a negative holding of the asset in question. If, however, the proceeds are
“impounded” to serve as collateral for the borrowed asset, such a short
position may differ from a negative holding of the asset in question. In many
countries, proceeds from some short sales are impounded in this manner,
and the short seller receives little or no interest on the impounded
amount 18. Moreover, some institutional investors are precluded from the
use of short positions, either through explicit rules or implicit threat of suit
18
  Often additional collateral must be “posted” as “margin”, but the short seller is generally
allowed to receive the earnings associated with the investment of this amount.


                                             W. F. Sharpe                                     321

of the CAPM (most importantly, the assumption that investors maximize
mean-variance utility functions). The resulting implications will then be
consistent with both theories. Moreover, by making assumptions about
investors’ objectives one can obtain precise statements about the signs and
magnitudes of the coefficients of the APT pricing relationship, as I have
shown in Sharpe (1984).

The Efficiency of the Market Portfolio
A key concept due to Markowitz (1952) is that of the efficiency of a portfolio.
In the present context a portfolio can be said to be efficient if it would be
optimal for an investor with some (non-negative) risk tolerance. Compari-
son of equations (2) and (3) directly implies that the market portfolio is
efficient in this sense.
   Consider an investor who has a risk tolerance equal to z, and holds the
market portfolio. Equation (3) shows that the first-order conditions for the
maximization of his or her utility will be met for every security. Since the
market portfolio will be optimal for such an investor, it must be efficient.
More specifically, the market portfolio will be optimal for an investor with
the average (societal) risk tolerance.

The Two-fund Separation Theorem
Under the conditions assumed in the CAPM, every investor’s optimal port-
folio can be obtained by a suitably chosen combination of any two arbitrarily
selected efficient portfolios17. Two natural choices are those that would be
optimal for investors with risk tolerances of zero and 7,. The former is the
minimum-variance portfolio. The latter is, of course, the market portfolio.
Following Tobin (1969), this is generally termed the two-fund separation
theorem.
   When a riskless asset is available, the minimum-variance portfolio will be
composed solely of that asset. Thus all investors will hold combinations of
the riskless asset and the market portfolio. For investors with risk tolerance

17
     To provide two-fund separation in this case, rewrite equation (2) as follows:

Portfolio optimality requires that this relationship be satisfied for each of the N securities and
that the full-investment constraint be met. This gives rise to a set of N+ 1 simultaneous
equations that can be written as:




where hz represents rk hp. Writing this in matrix notation gives:

The solution, obtained by multiplying both sides by the inverse of D is thus:

Note that the optimal portfolio is a linear function of Q. Thus it can be restated as a linear
function of any two vectors satisfying the above equation associated with different values of Q.


322                               Economic Sciences 1990

greater than r,, optimal investment will involve a negative position in the
riskless asset and a positive position in the market portfolio - and hence all
risky assets. Note, however, that the market portfolio will include the net
positive supply of riskless assets in the economy; hence only investors with $
values considerably greater than ‘5, will actually have to borrow money.
Every other investor will select some combination of the riskless asset and
the market portfolio, and thus require only non-negative holdings.

Key Implications
The key implications of the CAPM are that:
   1. the market portfolio will be efficient,
   2. all efficient portfolios will be equivalent to investment in the market
portfolio plus, possibly, lending or borrowing, and
   3. there will be a linear relationship between expected return and beta.
   Practical applications of these relationships are many. Investors can easily
identify efficient portfolio strategies and such strategies can be effectively
implemented through mutual funds and other institutional vehicles. Corpo-
rate and governmental decision-makers can use the Security Market Line
relationship to determine the desirability of an investment project by com-
paring its expected return with that available in the capital market for
projects with similar beta values (i.e. with similar market risk or sensitivity to
economic conditions).
   In the frictionless world of the CAPM, each investor chooses a portfolio
that maximizes his or her utility. This leads to an efficient distribution of risk
in the economy, given, of course, the distribution of wealth among inves-
tors.

NEGATIVE HOLDINGS
The CAPM assumes that investors can take negative positions in assets. For
the riskless asset, the traditional manner in which such a position is achieved
involves borrowing money. For a risky asset, the traditional method re-
quires a short sale.
  A “short position” is achieved by borrowing an asset such as a share of
stock, with a promise to repay in kind, typically on demand. The borrowed
asset is then sold, generating a cash receipt. If the proceeds of the sale may
be used for other types of investment, the overall effect is equivalent to that
of a negative holding of the asset in question. If, however, the proceeds are
“impounded” to serve as collateral for the borrowed asset, such a short
position may differ from a negative holding of the asset in question. In many
countries, proceeds from some short sales are impounded in this manner,
and the short seller receives little or no interest on the impounded
amount 18. Moreover, some institutional investors are precluded from the
use of short positions, either through explicit rules or implicit threat of suit
18
  Often additional collateral must be “posted” as “margin”, but the short seller is generally
allowed to receive the earnings associated with the investment of this amount.


                                   W. F. Sharpe                               323


for violation of fiduciary standards. Other restrictions may apply - for
example, exchanges may not allow a short sale following a previous decline
in the price of the security in question.
   Of necessity, arbitrage-based theories allow short positions. Whether
such positions will be taken in equilibrium is usually unclear, since the
models lack sufficient assumptions (i.e. those concerning utility functions)
to characterize equilibrium holdings. More importantly, by the very nature
of the arbitrage approach, multiple solutions in terms of holdings are
possible in equilibrium due to the presence (or potential presence) of
redundant securities.
   While the CAPM assumes that investors can take negative positions in any
asset, it implies that in equilibrium the only such positions taken will involve
the minimum-variance portfolio. When a riskless asset is available, the only
negative holdings in equilibrium will involve borrowing by investors with
above-average risk tolerance who wish to finance added investment in a
portfolio representing the overall capital market.
   With costless monitoring of investors’ positions, zero transactions costs,
and equal information about securities available to all investors, the only
restrictions on negative holdings would be those required to achieve pay-
ment of the requisite cash flows. An investor’s overall portfolio must be
such that in each state of the world the sum of the positive cash flows is at
least as large as the sum of the negative cash flows required to match the
payments made by the issuers of the securities held in negative amounts. If
this condition is violated, such securities have not been fully replicated and
the investor cannot expect to receive the full price when taking the associat-
ed negative positions.
   Since all information is not fully public, and monitoring and transactions
are costly, institutional arrangements for short selling have traditionally
required the posting of separate collateral for each position, with little if
any consideration given to the effects of diversification at the portfolio level.
Under such conditions it is difficult or expensive for a high risk-tolerance
investor to borrow money to finance added investment in a market-like
portfolio. Stock index futures contracts now provide investors with a more
efficient means for doing so. Before considering them, however, we investi-
gate the characteristics of an extreme case in which no negative positions
are allowed.


CAPITAL ASSET PRICES WITHOUT NEGATIVE HOLDINGS
Assumptions
To explore the effects of constraints on asset holdings we retain all the
assumptions of the CAPM and add N*K non-negativity constraints of the
form:
                                       for all i and k.


324                          Economic Sciences 1990


Portfolio Optimality
Investor k seeks to maximize Uk subject to a full investment constraint and
the relevant non-negativity constraints. This is a quadratic programming
problem. An exact solution to a portfolio optimization problem of this form
can be obtained using the critical line algorithm developed by Markowitz
(1956).
  When the solution is obtained, some values of X ik will be positive. The
corresponding securities are said to be in the optimal portfolio. The remain-
der will be at their lower bounds of zero and are said to be out of the
portfolio.
   Each of the securities in the optimal portfolio must have the same
marginal utility. If this were not the case, it would be possible to reallocate
funds from one such security with a lower marginal utility to one with a
higher marginal utility, thereby increasing utility without violating either
the full investment constraint or any of the non-negativity constraints. The
common value of marginal utility for such securities will be the investor’s
marginal utility of wealth, which we will again denote 1~.
   Each of the securities out of the portfolio must have a marginal utility less
than (or equal to) that of the securities in the portfolio. If this were not the
case, it would be possible to reallocate funds from a security in the portfolio
to one out of the portfolio, thereby increasing utility without violating any
of the constraints.
  These relationships, which derive from more general ones termed Kuhn-
Tucker conditions, can be written conveniently as:




where zik will be zero for securities in the portfolio and greater than or equal
to zero for securities out of the portfolio.

Aggregation
As with the CAPM, we take a wealth-weighted average of the conditions for
the optimality of individual investors’ portfolios. The result has a similar
form:

                                                                           (13)

  Not surprisingly, zim is a weighted average of the zik values for the K
investors, with the weights depending on the investors’ influences in the
marketplace, where influence depends on both wealth and risk tolerance”.



 19
      That is,


                                           W. F. Sharpe                                         325


Expected Returns
The previous equation can be transformated simply to obtain:




  Were it not for the last term, there would be a linear relationship between
expected return and beta, as in the CAPM. But the last term implies that
only securities that are in every investor’s optimal portfolio will plot along
such a line Every
               .      security that is out of at least one investor’s optimal
            20



                                       .
portfolio will plot below the line 21 Moreover,   the larger the number of
investors for whom the lower bound for a security is binding, the larger is
the corresponding value of zim, likely to be.
   It is important to note that the magnitudes of the z im values will be
affected by the distribution of risk tolerances across investors. In the special
case in which all investors have the same risk tolerance, everyone will choose
to hold the market portfolio and all the zim, values will equal zero, giving
results identical to those of the original CAPM. Loosely speaking, the
greater the variation in risk tolerances across investors, the more likely it is
that some of the zim values will be positive. Note, however, that in this
connection each investor’s influence will depend on both his or her wealth
and risk tolerance. Unless there is substantial variation in the risk tolerances
of the wealthiest investors, the zim values may be very close to zero, giving
results very similar to those of the original CAPM.

The Risk Premium
To determine the risk premium in this case, one must take a market value-
weighted average of the equilibrium relationships in the previous equation.
Doing so gives:




  Clearly, the risk premium per unit of variance will be a function of the
extent to which investors’ portfolios are affected by the non-negativity
constraints”.


20
   Only for such securities will all the zik values be zero, giving value of zero for zim, (their
weighted average).
21
   At least one zik value will be positive; since the remainder will all equal zero, the value of zim
(their weighted average) will be positive.
22
   Multiplying equation (13) by Xim, and summing over i gives:


Rearranging terms gives equation (1.5).
 moreover, the magnitude of h,,,, will be also be affected by such restrictions.
23


326                                    Economic Sciences 1990


The Security Market Line Relationship
Given the final term in the previous equation, it is not particularly instruc-
tive to drive a counterpart to the security market line of the CAPM.
However, equation (14) can stand as the analogue to a security market line
for this case. As indicated earlier, the first two terms do indeed provide such
a line. However, in this case the line serves as an upper boundary. Some or
all of the securities may plot below the line, with the distances dependent on
the degree to which the associated non-negativity constraints are binding.
Thus there may not be a precise linear relationship between expected
returns and beta values.

Riskless Securities
In this case no riskless borrowing is allowed, since negative positions are
precluded. The net positive supply of riskless securities will, however, be
included in the market portfolio. For any investor for whom the constraint
on borrowing is binding, 1~ will exceed R For all others, the two values will
                                                         f.

be equal. Hence, 3Lf, will equal or exceed R                  f




The Efficiency of the Market Portfolio
In the CAPM, the marginal utilities of all securities with respect to the
holdings in the market portfolio are equal when evaluated using the societal
risk tolerance. This is sufficient for the efficiency of the market portfolio. It
is also necessary if the market portfolio is to be efficient for an investor with
the societal risk tolerance.
   More generally, for the market portfolio to be efficient, the marginal
utilities of all securities measured relative to the market portfolio must be
equal when evaluated using some positive risk tolerance. This follows from
the fact that the market portfolio includes positive amounts of every securi-
ty, hence all securities will be in such a portfolio.
   For this condition to be met, there must be a linear relationship between
security expected returns and their beta values24. With restrictions on
negative holdings this may not be the case, due to the influences of the z im
values 25. Hence the market portfolio may be inefficient. Of course, the




To meet condition for efficiency of the market portfolio, there must thus be a strictly linear
relationship between E, and p*,,,. Moreover, the intercept and slope must both be positive,
otherwise the implied values of λ and τ, respectively will be negative.
25
   If all the zim values are zero, of course, the linear relationship will obtain. In the highly unlikely
event that there is a linear relationship between the z im values and the corresponding beta values,
there will also be a linear relationship between the E and p,, values.
                                                          j


                                             W. F. Sharpe                    327


extent of the inefficiency will depend on the magnitudes of the z im values -
if most are small, the degree of inefficiency of the market portfolio may be
inconsequential.

Fund Separation
Markowitz (1959) showed that non-negativity constraints cause the efficient
frontier to be piecewise linear in the space of holdings. Within each linear
range, efficient portfolios can be obtained by combining any two other
portfolios within the range . . However, no two portfolios can, in general,
                              26



be utilized to obtain all efficient portfolios. Hence two-fund separation may
not strictly apply in this case.

Key Implications
When negative positions are precluded:
   1. the market portfolio may not be efficient,
   2. some efficient portfolios may not be equivalent to investment in the
market portfolio plus, possibly, lending or borrowing, and
   3. there may not be a linear relationship between expected return and
beta.
   All these implications suggest a diminution in the efficiency with which
risk can be allocated in an economy. The choice of optimal portfolios
becomes more difficult than in the simple setting of the CAPM. Calculations
of cost of capital for corporate and governmental investment projects may
require more than the determination of a simple relationship between
expected return and market risk. More fundamentally, overall welfare may
be lower than it would be if the constraints on negative holdings could be
reduced or removed.
   While the magnitudes of the departures from the implications of the
original CAPM might be small even under the extreme conditions assumed
in this case, it is clear that institutional arrangements to improve investor’s
abilities to take negative positions can increase the efficiency with which risk
is allocated in an economy. Following some comments on financial innova-
tion in general, I will discuss the stock index futures contract - an innova-
tion that provides such an improvement.


FINANCIAL INNOVATION
More than most sciences, economics not only analyzes reality, it also alters
it. Theory leads to empiricism which changes behavior. Nowhere is this
more evident than in financial economics. The academic field of finance
differs radically from that of three decades ago, due in large part to
advances in financial economic theory and to the extensive empirical re-
search that has flowed from those advances. At least as important, the
practice of finance has been affected in fundamental ways by the progress in

26
     those lying at the end-points provide convenient choices.


328                           Economic Sciences 1990

financial economics. Most notably, the last decade has been marked by
unprecedented innovation in financial instruments, markets and institu-
tions.
   Given the bewildering pace of such innovation, it is not surprising that
some individuals and organizations have at times found it difficult to fully
understand the proper uses of some of the new instruments and proce-
dures. Evidence abounds that those who fail to learn the principles of
financial economics in more formal ways will do so through experience.
Markets are effective although sometimes cruel teachers. In general, finan-
cial systems are self-correcting. Given time, participants learn to use new
instruments and procedures to improve overall welfare, not just to reallo-
cate wealth from one set of hands to another. It is usually best to wait until
the forces of competition are able to regulate a market rather than to
impose regulations prematurely.
   Much financial innovation has been possible due to the remarkable
advances in computation and communication technology. Moreover, in-
creased global competition, with the accompanying diminution of monopo-
ly power on the part of organizations and governments, has played an
important role. Nonetheless, I cannot help but believe that discoveries in
the science of financial economics have had a major influence. Stock index
futures contracts appear to provide a clear example of this.



STOCK INDEX FUTURES CONTRACTS
Features
A traditional forward contract is an agreement on the part of the seller to
deliver a stated amount of a commodity on a given future date to the buyer
at a pre-specified price. A futures contract is a standardized forward contract
with the further provision that the delivery price be reset at the end of each
trading day to equal the price at which new agreements were struck. At the
time of each such resetting, one of the two parties pays the other an amount
equal to the difference between the new price and the old. This process is
known as “posting variation margin” as a result of the “marking to market”
of the price of the contract.
   The seller of a futures contract is said to be short the contract; the buyer is
said to be long .
   Futures exchanges make it possible for the two parties in a contract to be
“unlinked”. Thus A may sell a contract to B. B may later sell it to C without
A’s involvement. And later, C may sell it to A, extinguishing it before the
final delivery date.
   To protect the other party in such an arrangement, each party must post
collateral as “margin”. The amount need only cover potential losses be-
tween two trading days, however, due to the process of marking to market.
Margins equal to 10% to 20% of the value of a position typically suffice. To
insure that collateral is maintained, yet preserve the standardization of the


                                             W. F. Sharpe                    329

contract, brokers representing those with positions utilize a clearing house,
which provides assurance that obligations will be met.
   A financial futures contract may call for the actual delivery of a stated
financial instrument or one or more of a set of such instruments. Alternati-
vely, it may call only for a final marking to market on the delivery day, with
one party paying the other an amount equal to the difference between the
prior futures price and the value of the underlying financial instrument on
the delivery day. The latter is often termed cash delivery.
   A stock index futures contract covers a pre-specified portfolio of stocks. It
allows investors to take long or short positions in diversified portfolios.
Most such contracts provide for cash delivery.

Effects
A key aspect of a stock index futures contract is its focus on a diversified
portfolio rather than on an individual security or commodity. In this respect,
such a contract is similar to a mutual fund, unit trust, commingled index
fund or stock index option. All provide investors with “packages” of securi-
ties, substantially reducing the costs associated with diversification. Recent
growth in investors’ reliance on all such vehicles stands, at least in part, as
testimony to the influence of financial economics on the process by which
risk is borne in modern economies.
   A second feature of a stock index futures contract is of particular interest
in the present context. Such a contract provides an efficient method for
simultaneously taking a positive position in a diversified stock portfolio and
a negative position in a riskless asset. In effect, the purchaser of such a
contract borrows money to purchase a stock portfolio while the seller lends
money and takes a short position in the stock portfolio27. If the buyer of the
contract posts as margin riskless securities with a value equal to that of the
futures position, the net effect is similar to that of investing a comparable
amount in the stocks in the associated index. If less than 100% margin is
posted, the effect is similar to that of a levered purchase of the stocks in the
index. While not precisely the same as borrowing at the riskless rate to
purchase a portfolio of stocks, a long position in a futures contract can
provide a very close approximation to such a strategy. Moreover, the upper
limit on the borrowing implicit in the arrangement is sufficiently large to
satisfy all but a potentially few investors with extremely high risk tolerances.
   It is striking that a levered holding of a highly diversified portfolio (i.e.
the market portfolio) is precisely the optimal investment strategy for high
risk tolerance investors in the simple setting of the original CAPM. While no
financial futures contract corresponds to the overall market portfolio,
combinations of existing contracts (including those on bonds and other
types of securities) may approximate such a strategy.
   In a sense, the seller of a futures contract holds negative positions in the
underlying securities, and the existence of such positions is inconsistent

27
     For details see, for example, Duffie (1989)


330                            Economic Sciences 1990

with the implications of the CAPM. However, when viewed more broadly,
this inconsistency may be more apparent than real. Often the seller of a
stock index futures contract also holds the individual securities that make
up the index in question. The futures position thus provides a hedge against
changes in the value of the portfolio of actual stocks. As a result, the hedged
futures seller’s net position is virtually risk-free and hence equivalent to
investment in a riskless asset. Such a person can assemble the securities in
an economical manner and, in effect, provide a means for others to buy or
sell the package without incurring the costs associated with the purchase or
sale of large numbers of individual stocks. In effect, he or she loans money
to the high risk-tolerance investor to enable the latter to purchase added
amounts of risky securities.
   Futures contracts written on diversified portfolios require less margin
than would a set of contracts on individual securities, each with its own
required margin. Moreover, stock index contracts take advantage of econo-
mies of scale in transactions and record-keeping.
   In effect, stock index futures contracts provide those who might be
limited by traditional constraints on borrowing with a means for achieving
desirable investment strategies. Moreover, the strategies are similar to those
that are optimal for high risk-tolerance investors in the setting of the
original CAPM. Hence, the existence of such contracts may well bring
actual capital markets closer to those of this simple equilibrium theory. If
so, stock index futures contracts may significantly improve the efficiency
with which risk is allocated in an economy.

CONCLUSIONS
Here I have explicitly considered only one type of impediment to the
efficient allocation of risk. However, this case can serve as a representative
of many others. The greater the costs and constraints associated with the
purchase and sale of securities, the farther will an economy be from the goal
of allocating risk to those most able and willing to bear it.
   Happily, technological advances and greater understanding of the princi-
ples of financial economics are reducing costs and constraints of this type at
a rapid pace. As a result, capital markets are moving closer to the conditions
assumed in some of the simpler types of financial theory. Far more impor-
tant: the combined efforts of theoreticians, empiricists and practitioners are
increasing the efficiency with which risk is allocated among individuals,
leading to improvements in social welfare.



REFERENCES
Arrow, K. (1953), “Le Role des Valeurs Boursieres pour la repartition la Meilleure
  des Risques,” Econometric, Colloques Internationaux du Centre National de la
  Recherche Scientifique, Vol. XI, Paris, 41-47.
Black, F. (1972), “Capital Market Equilibrium with Restricted Borrowing,“Journal of
  Business, 45:44-454.


                                      W. F. Sharpe                                  331

Black, F. and M. Scholes (1973), “The Pricing of Options and Corporate Liabilities,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 81:637 - 654.
Breeden, D. (1979), “An Intertemporal Asset Pricing Model with Stochastic Con-
  sumption and Investment Opportunities,” Journal of Financial Economics, 7:265 -
  296.
Brennan, M.J. (1970), “Taxes, Market Valuation and Corporate Financial Policy,”
  National Tax Journal, December 1970, pp. 417-427.
Cox, J., S. Ross and M. Rubinstein (1979), “Option Pricing: A Simplified Ap-
  proach,” Journal of Financial Economics, 7, pp. 229 - 263.
Debreu, G. (1959), Theory of Value, New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Duffie, D. (1989). Futures Markets, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
Glenn, D. (1976), “Super Premium Security Prices and Optimal Corporate Financ-
  ing Decisions,” Journal of Finance, May 1976.
Kraus, A. and R. Litzenberger (1976), “Skewness Preference and the Valuation of
  Risk Assets,” Journal of Finance, 38: 1085-1100.
Levy, H. (1978), “Equilibrium in an Imperfect Market: A Constraint on the Number
  of Securities in a Portfolio,” American Economic Review, 68:643 - 658.
Levy, H. and H. Markowitz (1979), “Approximating Expected Utility by a Function
  of Mean and Variance,” American Economic Review, June 1979.
Lintner, J. (1965), “The Valuation of Risk Assets and the Selection of Risky Invest-
  ments in Stock Portfolios and Capital Budgets,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
  47:13-37.
Lintner, J. (1969), “The Aggregation of Investors’ Diverse Judgements and Prefer-
  ences in Purely Competitive Markets,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analy-
  sis, 4:346-382.
Markowitz, H. (1952), “Portfolio Selection,” Journal of Finance, 7:77-91.
Markowitz, H. (1956), “The Optimization of a Quadratic Function Subject to Linear
  Constraints,” Naval Research Logistics Quarterly, 3, pp. 111 - 133.
Markowitz, H. (1959), Portfolio Selection: Efficient Diversification of Investments, New
  York: John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
Markowitz, H. (1987), Mean-Variance Analysis in Portfolio Choice and Capital Markets,
  New York: Basil Blackwell Inc.
Markowitz, H. (1990), “Risk Adjustment,” Journal of Accounting, Auditing and Fi-
  nance, forthcoming.
Merton, R. (1973), “An Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model,” Econometrica,
  41:867-887.
Merton, R. (1987), “A Simple Model of Capital Market Equilibrium With Incom-
  plete Information,” Journal of Finance, 52:483-510.
Modigliani, F. and M. Miller (1958), “The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance, and
  the Theory of Investment,” American Economic Review, 48:261-297.
Mossin, J. (1966), “Equilibrium in a Capital Asset Market,” Econometrica, 35: pp.
  768-783.
Ross, S. (1976), “Arbitrage Theory of Capital Asset Pricing,” Journal of Economic
  Theory, 13: pp. 341-360.
Rubinstein, M. (1974). “An Aggregation Theorem for Securities Markets,” Journal of
  Financial Economics, 1:225 - 244.
Sharpe, W. (1961), “Portfolio Analysis Based on a Simplified Model of the Relation-
  ships Among Securities,” PhD Dissertation, University of California at Los An-
  geles, June 1961.
Sharpe, W. (1963), “A Simplified Model for Portfolio Analysis,” Management Science,
  9:277-293.
Sharpe, W. (1964). “Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium Under
  Conditions of Risk,“, Journal of Finance, 19:425-442.
Sharpe, W. (1970), Portfolio Theory and Capital Markets, New York: McGraw-Hill.
Sharpe, W. (1978), Investments, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall.


332                            Economic Sciences 1990


Sharpe, W. (1984), “Factor Models, CAPMs, and the APT,” Journal of Portfolio
  Management, Fall 1984, pp. 21-25.
Tobin, J. (1969), “Liquidity Preference as Behavior Towards Risk,” Review of Econom-
  ic Studies, 25:65-86.
Von Neumann, J. and O. Morgenstern (1944), Theory of Games and Economic Behavior,
  Princeton: Princeton University Press.
